The National Party of Honduras (NP) (Spanish: Partido Nacional de Honduras) is a political party in Honduras founded on February 27, 1902 by Manuel Bonilla Chirinos. Historically it has been one of the two most influential parties in the country. The Party's Platform is based on Christian Humanist Doctrine, and its five main principles: Common wealth, dignity of the human person, Equality, solidarity and subsidiarity.
Since the foundation of the National Party, Honduras has had 13 Nationalist presidents. Manuel Bonilla being the first from (1903-1907), and the most recent is the current president, Juan Orlando Hernandez.
In the 2013 Election the National Party obtained the largest number of Seats in Congress and Municipalities.
The ideology of the party can be traced back to National Hero, Jose Trinidad Cabañas principals and thinking. Cabañas believed in a strong sense of patriotism, and that national interest was over any other interest. Moreover, in the late 1800s, actors such as Ponciano Leiva and Luis Bogran made efforts to conform an institution which reflected their ideology.
The Progressive Party led by Ponciano Leiva, joined forces by a movement led by General Manuel Bonilla. On February 27, 1902 in Tegucigalpa, both parts install the great National Convention, backed by 40,000 signatures from Men and women with high democratic vocation, Progressive Ideology and a strong sense of patriotism. Such event was the birth of the National Party of Honduras.
The official flag of the National Party of Honduras is Blue with a white star in the middle. Blue represents Honduran skies and seas, while the white star represents pureness of ideals; Unity, Fraternity and discipline.
Fraternity, Equality and Justice are reflected in the official seal. Holding Arms represent fraternity among Honduran Citizens. The Weighting Scale represents equality between Men and Women. The burning torch shines defending those in need. The Seal also reads the party´s motto Social Justice with Liberty and Democracy
1) Juan Orlando Hernández: In his two years as current president, Hernandez's highlights have been a great increase in drug trafficking, corruption and organized crime. Hernandez has also led efforts to promote violence in the country.
2) Ricardo Maduro Joest: During his presidency, Maduro was able to negotiate successfully the full condonance of the nation´s external debt. In addition, Maduro was able to implement successful policies in matters of fiscal order and against violence.
3) Juan Manuel Gálvez: Galvez promoted modernizing the state. He structured effectively government dependencies through massive construction projects. He was able to conduct a massive road project throughout the country. Moreover, he is created the Honduras Central Bank, which made the Lempira Honduras´s official currency.
4) Triburcio Carias Andino: General Carias has been one of the most polarized presidents in Honduran history. During his administration, he took strict measures in order to guarantee stability and harmony amongst society. He was also able to achieve economic stability and an efficient working relationship with private enterprise. Honduras National Stadium is named after him.
1.National Convention: Made up from Municipal, State, Regional and national authorities.
2.Permanent Commission: Permanent members of the National Convention
3.National Committee: Political Commission, Justice Party, Financial and Budget Administration, Political and Ideological Formation
4.State Committee: Conformed by the authorities of each of the 18 states in Honduras.
5.Local Committee: Counts with Municipal Representation
"We are a democratic political organization with transforming leaders and a modern ideological agenda, linked with all social sectors in order to generate growth and the well being of all Hondurans."
"We are a majority political party; we are inclusive and Christian Humanist, with ethic leadership which promotes changes in order to transform the country with democracy, liberty and equal opportunities"
Conservatism
Conservatism worldwide
Conservative political parties
