The Shadow Cabinet is a feature of the Westminster system of government. It consists of a senior group of opposition spokespeople who, under the leadership of the Leader of the Opposition, form an alternative cabinet to that of the government, and whose members shadow or mark each individual member of the Cabinet. Members of a shadow cabinet are often but not always appointed to a Cabinet post if and when their party gets into government. It is the Shadow Cabinet's responsibility to criticise the policies and actions of the government, as well as offering an alternative program.
In most countries, a member of the shadow cabinet is referred to as a Shadow Minister. In Canada, however, the term Opposition Critic is more common. In the United Kingdom's House of Lords and in New Zealand, the term "spokesperson" is used instead of "shadow".
The first shadow cabinet was instituted by UK leader of the opposition Hugh Gaitskell in 1951 to assist in opposing the policies of the government of Winston Churchill.
In the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand the major opposition party and specifically its shadow cabinet is called His or Her Majesty's Loyal Opposition. The adjective "loyal" is used because, while the role of the opposition is to oppose Her Majesty's Government, it does not dispute the sovereign's right to the throne and therefore the legitimacy of the government. However, in other countries that use the Westminster system, the opposition is known simply as The Parliamentary Opposition.
Some parliamentary parties, notably the Australian Labor Party, elect all the members of their shadow cabinets in a party room ballot, with the Leader of the Opposition then allocating portfolios to the Shadow Ministers. In other parliamentary parties, the membership and composition of the Shadow Cabinet is generally determined solely by the Leader of the Opposition.
In many jurisdictions, third parties (which are neither participant in the government nor in the official opposition) may also form their own parliamentary front benches of spokespersons; however, parliamentary standing orders on the right of parties to speak often dictate that it can only be granted to a party or group if a minimum number of members can be recorded by the party. In Ireland, for example, technical groups are often formed by third parties and independent TDs in the Dáil Éireann in order to increase the members' right to speak against larger parties which can afford the right to speak as Front Benches in Government or Opposition.
While the practice of parliamentary shadow cabinets or frontbenches is not widespread in Germany, party leaders have often formed boards of experts and advisors ("teams of experts", or Kompetenzteam, in CDU/CSU and SPD parlance; alternate "top team", or Spitzenteam, in Alliance '90/The Greens parlance).
Australia
Shadow Cabinet of Australia (Australian Labor Party) (Bill Shorten)
New South Wales
New South Wales Shadow Cabinet (Australian Labor Party) (Luke Foley)
The Bahamas
Shadow Cabinet (Progressive Liberal Party) (Perry Christie)
Canada
Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet of the 42nd Parliament of Canada (Conservative Party of Canada) (Rona Ambrose (Interim))
Ontario
Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet of the 41st Legislative Assembly of Ontario (Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario) (Patrick Brown)
Ireland
Opposition Front Bench (Ireland) (Fianna Fáil) (Micheál Martin)
Italy
Shadow Cabinet of Italy (Governo ombra) (Walter Veltroni)
Japan
Democratic Party of Japan (Banri Kaieda)
Lithuania
Shadow Cabinet of Lithuania (Šešėlinis kabinetas) (Andrius Kubilius).
Malaysia
Shadow Cabinet of Malaysia (Democratic Action Party)
New Zealand
Official Opposition (New Zealand) (New Zealand Labour Party) (Andrew Little)
Frontbench team of Andrew Little
Romania
Shadow Cabinet (Romanian: Cabinetul din umbră)
Serbia
Shadow Cabinet (Serbian: Влада у сенци)
Sri Lanka
Joined Opposition ( lead by ex-President Mahinda Rajapakshe)
Slovenia
Shadow Cabinet (Slovenska demokratska stranka)
Solomon Islands
Shadow Cabinet of Solomon Islands (Democratic Party and allies)
South Africa
Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet (South Africa) (Democratic Alliance) (Mmusi Maimane)
Thailand
Shadow Cabinet (Democrat Party) (Abhisit Vejjajiva)
Ukraine
Shadow Government (Bloc of Yulia Tymoshenko, Arseniy Yatsenyuk)
United Kingdom
Official Opposition Shadow Cabinet (United Kingdom) (Labour) (Jeremy Corbyn)
Scotland
Shadow Cabinet (Scottish Parliament) (Scottish Conservatives) (Ruth Davidson)
Wales
Official Shadow Cabinet (National Assembly for Wales) (Plaid Cymru) (Leanne Wood)
Shadow government (disambiguation)
Minority leader
