Juan Orlando Hernández Alvarado, often written as JOH, (born October 28, 1968 in Gracias, Lempira) is a Honduran politician and businessman who is the current President of Honduras following his victory in the 2013 Honduran presidential election. A member of the conservative National Party of Honduras, he was the President of the National Congress of Honduras between January 2010 and June 2013 when he was given permission by the Congress to absent himself from all responsibilities in the Congress to dedicate himself to his presidential campaign.
Juan Orlando Hernández is a lawyer who graduated from the Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras, where he was President of the Association of Students from 1988 to 1989. He's a graduate in social and legal sciences with a master's degree in public administration, at the State University of New York, and studied legislation at the Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Honduras. He is a lawyer and a notary.
He is a businessman in coffee cultivation in his native Gracias and in the radio and television industries as well as being an owner of hotels. He gained notoriety in Honduras when Liberal leader Rafael Pineda Ponce described him as a “cipote malcriado” (spoiled kid).
Juan Orlando Hernández, who represented Lempira Department since 2001, was elected head of a National Congress where the National Party had a comfortable majority, on January 21, 2010, and took office four days later.
In 2012 he fought a campaign against Ricardo Álvarez to try to become the 2013 presidential nationalist candidate, and won the internal election of November 2012.
A poll conducted in May 2013 saw him in 3rd place with a projected 18% of the vote. He began his presidential campaign in July 2013 in Intibucá and La Paz with a campaign entitled El Pueblo Propone (The People Propose in English). He campaigned for the military to police the streets, and claimed that his closest rival Xiomara Castro wanted to remove the Policía Militar (English: Military Police) which were already in Honduras' two main cities. He won the election, beating Castro by 250,000 votes.
Hernandez said National Party accountants found that money from companies with links to the IHSS scandal(one of the worst corruption scandals in the country's history) had entered its campaign coffers.
Hernández, on January 27, 2014, became the fifty-fifth President Honduras, for a four-year term.
Hondurans living in various countries such as: Guatemala, Spain, the United States, Belgium, Austria, Italy, etc... have protested against the corruption in Honduras aimed at the government, the judiciary, the military, the police and other entities related to the public administration of the country, and demanding an end to the theft of funds and public money; for example, the embezzlement of the IHSS, and similar cases which have shaken and moved the country.
On October 7. 2015, the United States Department of Justice released a statement saying that Jaime Rosenthal, his son Yani Rosenthal and nephew Yankel Rosenthal, as well as seven other businesses, were labeled "specially designated narcotics traffickers" under the Foreign Narcotics Kingpin Designation Act, the first time this had been used against a bank outside the United States. As a result, the Honduran National Commission for Banks and Insurance (Comisión Nacional de Banca y Seguros, CNBS), forcibly liquidated Banco Continental, property of the Rosenthal family, which was closed as of Monday, October 12, 2015, as well as other businesses and properties allegedly involved in money laundering. Hernández said that the financial system "is solid" and made it clear that this "is a problem between Banco Continental and the USA justice system".
Hernandez has been the spotlight of his own people since his presidential debut in 2014, criticized for not taking solutions to economic problems, ignoring the unemployment rate, using military task force to suppress human rights, diverging public fund, and for media covering such corruption scandals.
