Park Ji-yeon (born June 7, 1993), better known simply as Jiyeon, is a South Korean singer, actress and model. She is best known for being the visual, main dancer and the youngest member of K-pop girl-group T-ara.
Ji-yeon was born in Seoul, South Korea on 7 June 1993, from a Korean family. She briefly attended Hyehwa Girls' High School and graduating from Lila Art High School in 2012.
She and Eunjung are the only two members of T-ara to be trained in acting. Instead, the two switched over to singing despite their original intentions.
Ji-yeon has expressed an interest in modeling. In 2008, when she was 15 years old, Ji-yeon was featured in several pictorials and advertisements for clothing company Smart with Korean boy band SHINee. She collaborated with Davichi and SeeYa on the digital single "Female Generation/Forever Love", which was released in May 2009, making her the first member of T-ara to appear in public. She appeared in SG Wannabe's music videos "Saranghae" and "My Love is Crying" from their 2009 album, Gift from SG Wannabe. Early on, the Korean media dubbed Ji-yeon "Little Kim Tae-hee" due to her close resemblance to Kim.
In the same year 2008, she entered and won the Smart Model Contest. Subsequently, she auditioned at the Mnet Casting System and joined the company. T-ara debuted on 29 July 2009, when Ji-yeon was 16 years old; the majority of the members were in their early twenties. She was the youngest member until Areum was introduced in June 2012, followed by Dani, who was added in December on the same year.
Ji-yeon made an appearance on the highly ranked KBS television show Master of Study as Na Hyun Jung, a heavily burdened love-struck high school girl who joins a special class consisting of five underperforming students who must gain acceptance to the top South Korean university, commonly referred to as the "Cheonha-Dae" (in Korean). Ji-yeon played the lead character in Death Bell 2: Bloody Camp alongside Yoon Shi-yoon, which was released in July 2010.
In August 2010, she appeared on HahaMong Show and discussed meeting Park Ji-sung. In October 2010, Ji-yeon became the host for Show! Music Core (MBC), alongside Suzy (Miss A) with Minho and Onew, both of SHINee.
During the 19 August 2011 rehearsal taping of KBS Music Bank for their final stage performance of promoting Roly Poly, Ji-yeon pulled a right knee ligament and was rushed to the hospital for further treatment. Her agency released a statement saying that Jiyeon's condition was being monitored. She was reported recovering and continuing to attend tour after tour, although she needed considerable assistance for each trip due to her injuries. She was later cast in Dream High Season 2 as Rian/Lee Ji Kyung.
In 2011, she was ranked on MBC's Weekly Idol as the 'best-looking idol in real life' by fellow idols and once again in 2012 as the 'best-looking idol' for her versatile face and glowing character. In 2013, she hosted along with Nichkhun from 2PM, Jokwon from 2AM, Minho from Shinee and Suzy from Miss A For 2013 Korean Music Wave In Bangkok, Thailand.
It was revealed that Jiyeon and fellow T-ara member Hyomin would musically debut solo – promoting simultaneously, or in early April and early May, respectively. On March 28 it was announced that Jiyeon would start promoting on May 20, with single "1min 1sec" (Hangul: 1분 1초). The single peaked on the Korean charts at 17 and excelled in China, becoming the first Korean song to reach a 99.5% YinYueTai score.
In June, Jiyeon resumed her acting career, appearing in the fifteenth episode of Triangle (MBC), as Sung Yoo-jin – anticipated to be a potential wife for Yim Si-wan (ZE:A)'s character. In September, she was cast as MC for the fourth season of The Show (SBS MTV), with Lee Hyeri (Girl's Day) and a new male model MC 
After the departure of Jiyeon's co-MC host Hyeri Jiyeon will be working with the new male MC Hongbin (VIXX) alongside Zhou Mi (Super Junior-M).
In May, Jiyeon was confirmed to play the lead role in a Korean-Chinese film 'Encounter' and will be on her way to China on May 7. Currently, actor Lee Dong Gun was confirmed to play the lead role alongside Jiyeon. Filmed by a rookie director, Kim Jung Han, 'Encounter' is about a romance that unfolds on a cruise ship that travels between Barcelona, Spain and the Indian Ocean.
In July 2015, Jiyeon and South Korean actor Lee Dong Gun were confirmed to be dating for about a month since they filmed their Korean-Chinese film 'Encounter'.
