The Polish Socialist Party (Polish: Polska Partia Socjalistyczna, PPS) was a left-wing Polish political party, it was one of the most important parties in Poland from its inception in 1892 until its dissolution in 1948. A party with the same name was established in 1987 but has remained at the margins of Polish politics.
Józef Piłsudski, founder of the resurrected Polish state, was a member and later leader of the PPS in the early 20th century.
The PPS was founded in Paris in 1892 (see the Great Emigration). In 1893 the party called Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania, (SDKPiL), emerged from the PPS, with the PPS being more nationalist and oriented towards Polish independence, and the SDKPiL being more revolutionary and communist. In November 1892 the leading personalities of the PPS agreed on a political program. The program, largely progressive for the time of its creation, accented:
Independent Republic of Poland based on democratic principles
Direct universal voting rights
Equal rights for all nations living in Poland
Equal rights for all citizens, regardless of race, nationality, religion and gender
Freedom of press, speech and assembly
Progressive taxation
Eight-hour workday
Minimum wage
Equal wages for men and women
Ban on child labour (till age 14)
Free education
Social support in case of injury in the workplace
After the Revolution of 1905 in the Russian Empire, the party membership drastically increased from several hundred active members to a mass movement of about 60,000 members. Another split in the party occurred in 1906, with the Revolutionary Faction following Józef Piłsudski, who supported the nationalist and independence ideals, and the Left faction which allied itself with the SDKPiL. However, the Revolutionary Faction became dominant and renamed itself back again to the PPS, while the Left was eclipsed, and in 1918 merged with SDKPiL forming the Communist Party of Poland. In 1917-18 the party participated in the Central Council of Ukraine and the Government of Ukraine.
During the Second Polish Republic the PPS at first supported Józef Piłsudski, including his May Coup, but later moved into the opposition to his authoritarian Sanacja regime by joining the democratic 'centrolew' (center-left) opposition movement. Many PPS leaders and members were put on trial by Piłsudski's regime and jailed in the infamous Bereza Kartuska prison.
The party was a member of the Labour and Socialist International between 1923 and 1940.
The party supported the Polish resistance during World War II as the underground Polish Socialist Party – Freedom, Equality, Independence (Polska Partia Socjalistyczna – Wolność, Równość, Niepodległość). In 1948 it suffered a fatal split, as the communists applied the salami tactics to dismember any opposition. One faction, which included Edward Osóbka-Morawski wanted to join forces with the Polish Peasant Party and form a united front against the Communists. Another faction, led by Józef Cyrankiewicz, argued that the Socialists should support the Communists in carrying through a socialist program, while opposing the imposition of one-party rule. Pre-war political hostilities continued to influence events, and Stanisław Mikołajczyk, leader of the Peasant Party, would not agree to form a united front with the Socialists. The Communists played on these divisions by dismissing Osóbka-Morawski and making Cyrankiewicz Prime Minister.
In 1948, Cyrankiewicz's faction of Socialists merged with the Communist Polish Workers' Party (PPR) to form the Polish United Workers' Party (Polska Zjednoczona Partia Robotnicza; PZPR), the ruling party in the People's Republic of Poland; remnants of the other faction survived on emigration in the Polish government-in-exile.
A new party of the same name, which seeks to carry on the tradition of the original PPS, was established by left-wing opposition figures such as Jan Józef Lipski in 1987. However, the new PPS remains a marginal group within the political landscape of the Third Republic.
Its main propaganda outlet was the Robotnik ('The Worker') newspaper.
Józef Piłsudski (former member at time in office)
Stanisław Wojciechowski (former member)
Ignacy Mościcki (former member)
Stanisław Ostrowski
Franciszek Trąbalski
Ignacy Daszyński
Jędrzej Moraczewski
Janusz Jędrzejewicz (former member)
Walery Sławek (former member)
Tomasz Arciszewski
Tadeusz Tomaszewski
Antoni Pająk
Alfred Urbański
Edward Osóbka-Morawski (later became a communist)
Józef Cyrankiewicz (later became a communist)
Jan Józef Lipski
Bolesław Limanowski
Adam Ciołkosz
Lidia Ciołkosz
Jerzy Czeszejko-Sochacki (later became a communist)
Norbert Barlicki
Jan Kwapiński
Herman Lieberman
Stanisław Mendelson
Stanisław Dubois
Jan Mulak
Mieczysław Niedziałkowski
Antoni Pajdak
Feliks Perl
Kazimierz Pużak
Kazimierz Sosnkowski
List of Polish Socialist Party politicians
Central Rada
