Union, Progress and Democracy (Spanish: Unión Progreso y Democracia [uˈnjon, pɾoˈɣɾeso i ðemoˈkɾaθja]; officially abbreviated as UPyD [upeiˈðe], although it's occasionally abbreviated as UPYD or UPD [upeˈðe]) is a Spanish political party founded in September 2007. It is a social liberal party which rejects any form of nationalism, especially peripheral nationalism like the separatist Basque and Catalan movements. The party is deeply pro-European and wants the European Union to adopt a federal system without overlap between the European, national and regional governments. Besides, the magenta party wants to replace the State of Autonomies with a symmetric and highly centralized, albeit still federal, system in Spain as well as substituting a more proportional election law for the current one.
Mikel Buesa, at a 2007 party presentation, and Rosa Díez, in a 2007 interview for a magazine, explained the origin of the three concepts which make up the party's name: Union because of their "unconditional defence of the unity of Spain as a guarantor of Spaniards' equality before the law". Progress because they affirm to be "a progressive party with social liberal roots and respectful of individual liberty". And Democracy because of their "commitment to a radical regeneration of democracy".
UPyD first stood for election in the 9 March 2008 general election. It received 303,246 votes, or 1.2 percent of the national total, and one seat in the Congress of Deputies for party co-founder Rosa Díez, becoming the newest party with national representation in Spain. Although its core is in the Basque Autonomous Community, with roots in anti-ETA civic associations, it addresses a national audience. Prominent members of the party include philosopher Fernando Savater, party founder and former PSOE MEP Rosa Díez, philosopher Carlos Martínez Gorriarán and writer Álvaro Pombo.
At its Second Party Congress in November 2013, UPyD reported 6,165 registered members (down from an all-time high of 6,634 in 2011. In 2009 the party founded the think tank Fundación Progreso y Democracia (FPyD: Progress and Democracy Foundation), which has been presided over by UPyD spokesperson Rosa Díez.
In the general elections held on 20 November 2011, the party won 1,143,225 votes (4.70 percent), five seats in the Congress of Deputies (four in Madrid and one in Valencia) and became the fourth-largest political force in the country. It had the greatest increase of votes over the previous general election of any party. It lost all its seats at the 2015 general election and suffered a further decline in its vote, to 0.2%, in the 2016 general election.
On 19 May 2007, 45 people met in San Sebastián to discuss the creation of a new political party opposing both major parties (the People's Party and the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party) at the national level. Most present were Basques, many of whom had long experience in political, union and civic organizations with left-wing, liberal and activist backgrounds. After the meeting, to create a broad-based social and political project they formed the Plataforma Pro organization. This united those who considered it necessary to form a new national political party appealing to people across the democratic political spectrum. Its platform was:
The fight against ETA and politically motivated violence
Regeneration of Spanish democracy
Opposition to compulsory nationalism
Reforming the Spanish Constitution of 1978 to reinforce civil liberties and equality, independent of regional origin
Among the supporters of Plataforma Pro were philosopher Fernando Savater, ¡Basta Ya! coordinator and spokesman Carlos Martínez Gorriarán and former Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) MEP Rosa Díez. Díez resigned her PSOE membership and her MEP position in August 2007 to become involved with the UPyD project. Groups supporting Plataforma Pro included Citizens of Catalonia (notably Albert Boadella, Arcadi Espada and Xavier Pericay) and ¡Basta Ya!, a major influence on the new movement. In September 2007, Forum Ermua president Mikel Buesa announced their intention to participate in the political party arising from Plataforma Pro; he resigned in 2009 due to disagreements with Rosa Díez.
At a 29 September 2007 meeting in the auditorium of the Casa de Campo in Madrid, the new party was formed. Participants in its formation included Catalan dramatist Albert Boadella, Basque philosopher Fernando Savater, Peruvian writer Mario Vargas Llosa and Rosa Díez. Also present were journalist Arcadi Espada, anthropologists Teresa Giménez Barbat and Felix Perez Romera (three prominent Citizens of Catalonia members), historian Antonio Elorza, painter Agustín Ibarrola, former Forum Ermua leader Mikel Buesa, philosopher Carlos Martínez Gorriarán, Citizens deputies Albert Rivera and Antonio Robles, Peruvian writer Fernando Iwasaki, former UGT secretary general Nicolas Redondo and People's Party Basque MP Fernando Maura. Maura joined the new party's advisory council on 6 November 2007. Writer Álvaro Pombo later expressed support for UPyD, running as a candidate for the party.
UPyD has been assessed by the vast majority of political scientists and the media such as the European Social Survey, The Financial Times and The Economist as a centre party, even though it was considered as centre-left by the political scientist Donatella Maria Viola and centre-right by the Encyclopædia Britannica. Also, the self-proclaimed cross-sectionalism of UPyD has been linked to radical centrism.
UPyD is a progressive party which combines social liberalism with centralism from the centre of the political spectrum. UPyD is a centralist party which stands out for being the only statewide party that actively defends the abolition of chartered regimes in all Spain, even in those regions which have them: Navarre and the Basque Country. Similarly, UPyD argues that the extreme political decentralization of the State of Autonomies has weakened the welfare state and created inequalities across the territory. Accordingly, UPyD wants to adopt a symmetric federalism that entails, as well as a "reasonable political decentralization", a high degree of political centralization in Spain.
UPyD wholeheartedly defends the unity of Spain, thereby being an enemy of peripheral nationalism. The magenta party is an advocate for the Spanish national unity so unconditional that supports the application of the Article 155 of Spain's Constitution so as to suspend Catalonia's home rule, and the prosecution of Catalan separatist leaders for rebellion and sedition. Although UPyD is a progressive party strongly characterized by its rejection of peripheral nationalism, it also has objections to nation-state nationalism, including Spanish nationalism, because the party considers this kind of nationalism to be a threat to the progress of Europe's unity. UPyD is the most pro-European party in Spain and therefore supports a federal Europe, which the magenta party sees as an important guarantor of individual rights.
Ideologically, UPyD is not defined by itself as either left or right and its constituency includes voters with an affinity for the political right as well as part of the Socialist Party's disenchanted voters. When UPyD is asked to be placed on the left–right political spectrum, it defines itself as "a progressive party that is simultaneously positioned on the political centre and cross-sectionalism, thus embracing ideas across the political spectrum". According to spokesperson Rosa Díez, the party is "progressive and cross-sectional: it's got leftist people and right-wing, liberal people". Other additional identity signs are "constitutionalism", defining it as the upholding of the Spanish state of law under the Spanish Constitution of 1978; "secularism", defining it as the defence of a religiously neutral state in which a religious confession isn't privileged over others; "liberal democracy", defining it as the form of government which best balances power and individual rights; "pro-Europeanism", defining it as the desire to move towards a real European federalism with the concept of citizenship as a fundamental pillar; "Spanish patriotism", defining it as the defence of common values: justice, freedom and equality; and "non-nationalism", defining it as the opposition to compulsory nationalism. Rosa Díez defined UPyD, in opposition to Spain's peripheral nationalist and pro-independence parties, as "an unequivocally national party, with a unique agenda for Spain". According to Rosa Díez, "social liberalism" is the political doctrine which UPyD is identified with because the party combines elements of "political liberalism" and "social democracy". Furthermore, Rosa Díez said that UPyD is "a radical party which wants to transform politics by bringing off substantial, in-depth changes from within institutions". Also, Miguel Zarranz, UPyD's coordinator in Navarre, has clarified that UPyD is "a partially centralist party because it wants to centralize powers such as education, health, water resource management or transport management within a symmetric federal state with other decentralized responsibilities in the autonomous communities". Lastly, Álvaro Anchuelo commented that UPyD is "a monarchist party insofar as the monarchy fulfils its function".
Party proposals are:
Reform of the Spanish Constitution of 1978, focusing on three areas:
Doing away with the Spanish autonomic state. UPyD wants Spain to adopt a system of symmetric federalism with broad political centralization as a territorial model, clearly defining in the Constitution which powers are exclusive of the State and which ones are transferable to autonomous communities or municipalities. The party wants to centralize competences that concern citizens' fundamental rights like education, health and justice among others because the State of Autonomies, besides creating nationwide inequalities, is considered to be "elephantine, politically unviable and economically unsustainable". Another aspect of UPyD's symmetric federalism is the abolition of Navarre's and the Basque Country's chartered regimes, establishing a common system of funding for all autonomous communities. Other noteworthy proposals are municipal mergers so that municipalities have a minimum dimension of 20,000 inhabitants, the suppression of the provincial councils (diputaciones provinciales), chartered councils (diputaciones forales), Basque General Assemblies (Juntas Generales vascas) and district councils (comarcas), and the unicameralism of the Spanish General Courts after eliminating the Senate.
Improvement and reinforcement of individual rights and obligations, strictly defined for all Spanish citizens without territorial, linguistic, ideological or religious inequalities. By advocating a unitary and centralizing concept of the Spanish nation, UPyD defends the unity of Spain as "a key instrument to ensure the equality of the whole of the Spanish citizenry".
Deepening of the separation of powers, increasing judicial autonomy to ensure the independence of the Constitutional Court, the Court of Accounts and economic regulatory bodies from the executive.
By turning Spain into a secular state, the party supports a revision of existing agreements with the Holy See, the self-financing of the Catholic Church and other religious confessions and the total separation of church and state. Secularity for UPyD "consists in respecting only religions which are compatible with human rights, the state of law and democracy", in a way that the magenta party decries Islam because of "adulterous women's stoning" and "homosexuals' murder". Following this line of thought, the party supports the banning of Islamic headscarves (from burqa to hijab) in public spaces because they are considered to be "a way to subjugate women to men within Islam".
Reform of the Organic Act of the General Electoral Regime (LOREG) with 3 hopes: achieving voters' equality, regardless of residence; increasing the minority-party representation, underrepresented with today's electoral system compared to the majority-party one; and reducing regionalist and peripheral nationalist parties' representation. This reform raises biproportional apportionment of 350 seats in the Congress of Deputies. Of the 350 MPs, one would be elected from each province and one from each autonomous city for a total of 52 and the remaining 298 MPs would be elected by provinces, redeployed in proportion to the population, using the Sainte-Laguë method. But, the allocation of seats to parties would be based on the votes obtained in the 52 constituencies so that a party which has fewer votes than another can't receive more seats than that one. Firstly, the value of r-parameter, equivalent to 0.25% of the total valid votes, would be calculated. Secondly, r votes would be subtracted from those parties which have passed r votes, getting the reduced votes for each party; however, parties that hadn't reached r votes would be removed from the allocation of seats. Thirdly, using the D'Hondt method, 325 seats would be allocated proportionally to the reduced votes while the remaining 25 would be assigned according to the square of the reduced ones so as to achieve equity in parties' representation and compatible proportionality and governance. Finally, BAZI computer program, developed at the University of Augsburg, would be used to distribute the seats won by each party in the 52 constituencies.
Improvements in public education to promote secularism and scientific investigation, end language discrimination and ensure language choice in all nonlinguistic subjects in autonomous communities with more than one official language. UPyD guarantees bilingualism by making the study of Spanish and regional languages compulsory. The party opposes language discrimination in all public services.
Changes in the democratic system: eliminating the requirement for extra-parliamentary parties to receive 0.1 percent of their constituencies' electorate, an open list electoral system, the direct election of mayors in a two-round system preventing post-election agreements misrepresenting the citizens' will, a limit of two successive full terms for executive public officeholders, banning the combination of two (or more) public offices and reducing former high officeholders' conflicts of interest. The party suggests making political parties' funding more transparent, increasing their independence from economic interests.
Defeating ETA and other terrorist organizations, closing their funding channels and blocking their political justification. UPyD wants to outlaw the Amaiur, Bildu, EH Bildu and Sortu, considering the groups ETA's political arm; they justify ETA's violence, calling its imprisoned members "jailed politicians".
Economic and social measures promoting economic development and correcting inequalities. The state should improve workers' education, training and safety, integrate internal markets with infrastructure, favour research and innovation in business and guarantee economic freedom and competition.
Immigration control: Although the party believes that Ceuta's and Melilla's border fences must be protected, illegal immigrants must be treated sensitively and humanely. UPyD believes that the Civil Guard should stop illegal immigrants and legally repatriate them to their country of origin or return them to the country which they entered from without violating their human rights. It opposes the use of razor wires and rubber bullets, asking the European Union for a European action protocol to stop illegal immigration. The party wants the European Commission to include Ceuta and Melilla in the European customs area so the European Union will be involved in administering European external borders in both cities. UPyD would like to strengthen EU territorial integration.
Environmental policy which makes technological and economic development compatible with environmental and biodiversity protection. The party favors nuclear energy as part of an energy mix which includes renewable energy and hydraulic fracturing, scientific research of climate change and possible corrective measures, and strengthening laws on the protection of natural areas, opposing the loss of coastline and sensitive natural areas to urbanization and other misuses.
UPyD favors a Limits Law decriminalizing abortion before fourteen weeks. Limits would be determined by medical and scientific consensus, based on the early detection of malformations. Beyond that period UPyD favors abortion only to save a mother's life, reconciling her right to consenting maternity with the protection of an unborn person. The party considers abortion "a drama" rather than a right, supporting early sex education and information about all available contraceptive methods to prevent unwanted pregnancies. UPyD opposes abortion access by minors without parental consent.
Shortly after the party's creation, on 13 December 2007, UPyD held a press conference headed by Rosa Díez, Mikel Buesa, and Fernando Savater at which it denounced "evidently unequal" treatment by Spanish banks, which denied the party loans while forgiving debts held by the other political parties. Although party activity was funded by membership fees and small donations, it "could not continue this way" or contest an election with such meager resources. Therefore, the party leadership decided to offer €200, €500 and €1,000 bonds to fund the party's campaign for the 2008 general elections. The bonds, totaling €3 million–€5 million, were sold at party offices, on the internet and over a toll-free phone line. The party pledged to report the amount of the loans obtained and the state of its accounts, and intended to repay the money after the elections with institutional funding for parties with parliamentary representation.
The party's national spokesperson, Rosa Díez, won a seat in the general election of 2008 from Madrid Province with 3.74 percent of the vote. Other prominent candidates were writer Álvaro Pombo (for the Senate) and Carlos Martínez Gorriarán, both of whom failed to win seats.
In 2009, the party gained representation in the European Parliamentary election and the Basque Regional Elections. Their MEP, Francisco Sosa Wagner, sat in the non-aligned group in the European parliament. In the Basque elections, Gorka Maneiro was elected to represent Álava.
In 2011, Luis de Velasco Rami and 7 other UPyD members were elected to the Madrid Assembly, with UPyD becoming the fourth-largest party. In the 2011 local elections, the party won seats in Madrid, Burgos, Ávila, Granada, Alicante and Murcia. UPyD received the fourth-largest number of votes in the 2011 general election: 1,143,225, or 4.70 percent. Of the five seats won, four (held by Rosa Díez, Carlos Martínez Gorriarán, Álvaro Anchuelo and Irene Lozano) were in Madrid; actor Toni Cantó was elected in Valencia Province.
In the 2014 European Parliament Elections, Francisco Sosa Wagner was re-elected, and UPyD won three extra seats (for Maite Pagazaurtundúa, Fernando Maura and Beatriz Becerra), consolidating their support nationwide. The party's MEPs planned to join the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE) Group.
In July 2009, party co-founder Mikel Buesa announced his resignation from UPyD, denouncing "authoritarian control" imposed by a group in the party. After its First Party Congress in November 2009, 100 UPyD critics (including four founding members) left the party, "tired and disappointed" with the "authoritarian" Rosa Díez and the party's "lack of internal democracy". By early 2010, the party lost 40 percent of its membership in Catalonia, amid allegations that the party was a fraud.
Dorange, Monica (2013). Civilisation espagnole et hispano-américaine (in Spanish). Hachette Éducation. 400. ISBN 978-2-01-140215-8. 
Vidal, César; Jiménez Losantos, Federico (2012). La libertad tiene un precio (in Spanish). PLAZA & JANES EDITORES. 416. ISBN 978-84-01-34661-3. 
Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. (2014). Britannica Book of the Year 2014. Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc. 882. ISBN 978-1-62513-171-3. 
Cabestan, Jean-Pierre; Pavković, Aleksandar (2013). Secessionism and Separatism in Europe and Asia: To Have a State of One's Own. Routledge. 246. ISBN 978-0-415-66774-6. 
Ugarriza, Juan; Caluwaerts, Didier (2014). Democratic Deliberation in Deeply Divided Societies: From Conflict to Common Ground. Palgrave Macmillan. 248. ISBN 978-1-137-35781-6. 
Bel i Queralt, Germà (2012). Infrastructure and the Political Economy of Nation Building in Spain, 1720-2010. Sussex Academic Press. 172. ISBN 978-1-84519-507-6. 
Field, Bonnie N.; Botti, Alfonso (2013). Politics and Society in Contemporary Spain: From Zapatero to Rajoy. Palgrave Macmillan. 256. ISBN 978-1-137-30663-0. 
Ross, Christopher; Richardson, Bill; Sangrador-Vegas, Begoña (2013). Contemporary Spain. Routledge. 304. ISBN 978-1-4441-1699-1. 
Ştefuriuc, Irina (2013). Government Formation in Multi-Level Settings: Party Strategy and Institutional Constraints. Palgrave Macmillan. 200. ISBN 978-1-137-30074-4. 
Azagra Ros, Joaquin; Romero González, Joan (2012). Desde la margen izquierda (in Spanish). Universitat de València. 264. ISBN 978-84-370-8922-5. 
Montero, José Ramón; Lago, Ignacio (2010). Elecciones generales 2008 (in Spanish). Centre for Sociological Research (CIS). 520. ISBN 978-84-7476-550-2. 
Magone, José María (2009). Contemporary Spanish Politics. Taylor & Francis. 490. ISBN 978-0-415-42188-1. 
Muñoz Mendoza, Jordi (2012). La construcción política de la identidad española: ¿del nacionalcatolicismo al patriotismo democrático?. Colección Monografías (in Spanish). Centre for Sociological Research (CIS). 262. ISBN 978-84-7476-608-0. 
Montero, José Ramón; Riera, Pedro (2010). "La reforma del sistema electoral español: Preferencias y alternativas". La administración pública entre dos siglos (pdf) (in Spanish). Instituto Nacional de Administración Pública. pp. 163–184. ISBN 978-84-7351-396-8. 
Painter, Anthony (2013). Left Without a Future?: Social Justice in Anxious Times. Policy Network Series. B.Tauris. 244. ISBN 978-1-78076-661-4. 
Gillespie, Richard; Gray, Caroline (2015). Contesting Spain? The Dynamics of Nationalist Movements in Catalonia and the Basque Country. Routledge. 160. ISBN 978-1-317-40947-2. 
Miftari, Edita (2015). Gavrić, Saša; Bošnjak, Emina, eds. Human Rights do not Recognize Political Ideology! Political Parties and the Human Rights of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender People (pdf). Human Rights Series 34. Sarajevski otvoreni centar. 57. ISBN 978-9958-536-25-0. 
Lansford, Tom (2014). Political Handbook of the World 2014. CQ Press. 1856. ISBN 978-1-4833-3327-4. 
Ávila López, Enrique (2015). Modern Spain. Understanding Modern Nations. ABC-CLIO. 427. ISBN 978-1-61069-601-2. 
Viola, Donatella Maria (2015). Routledge Handbook of European Elections. Routledge. 824. ISBN 978-1-317-50363-7. 
