Friends of the Earth International (FoEI) is an international network of environmental organizations in 74 countries.
Friends of the Earth was founded in 1969 as an anti-nuclear group by Robert O Anderson who contributed $200,000 in personal funds to launch FOTE with David Brower, Donald Aitken and Jerry Mander after Brower's split with the Sierra Club. FOTE main mission was to lock up and prevent further development of nuclear energy. Their first employee was Amory Lovins, who kicked off FOE in the UK. It became an international network in 1971 with a meeting of representatives from the U.S., Sweden, the UK and France. For further historical details, see articles on the national FOE organizations.
FoEI is assisted by a small secretariat (based in Amsterdam, Netherlands) which provides support for the network and its agreed major campaigns. The executive committee of elected representatives from national groups sets policy and oversees the work of the secretariat. In 2010, Nigerian activist Nnimmo Bassey was elected to serve as chair of Friends of the Earth International.
Friends of the Earth considers environmental issues in their social, political and human rights contexts. Their campaigns stretch beyond the traditional arena of the conservation movement and seek to address the economic and development aspects of sustainability. Originally based largely in North America and Europe, its membership is now heavily weighted toward groups in the developing world.
The current campaign priorities of Friends of the Earth internationally are:
economic justice and resisting neoliberalism
forests and biodiversity
food sovereignty
climate justice and energy (Including releasing the song "Love Song To the Earth")
The campaign priorities are set at the bi-annual general meeting of Friends of the Earth International.
In addition to the priority campaign areas Friends of the Earth International has a number of other campaign areas which are active internationally. They include:
desertification
Antarctica
water
maritime
mining and extractive industries
nuclear power (see nuclear debate) 
consumption and intensive meat production (see Meat Atlas)
All FoE International campaigns incorporate elements of three core themes which are:
protecting human and environmental rights
protecting the planet's disappearing biodiversity
the repayment of ecological debt owed by rich countries to those they have exploited.
The Friends of the Earth in each country are themselves many-tiered networks reaching from individual activists up to the national pressure group which campaigns for environmentally progressive and sustainable policies. The groups and activists at all levels also carry out educational and research activities.
Friends of the Earth groups are required to act independently of party political, religious or other influences; be open, democratic and non-discriminatory in their internal structures; and be willing to cooperate with other organizations who are working for the same goals. These are conditions of remaining a member of FOEI.
The national groups work on the main issues affecting their own country and choose to participate in the international campaigns of FoEI which are relevant to them. In turn, the local campaigners can work on local, national and/or international campaigns.
The member organization in a particular country may name itself Friends of the Earth or an equivalent translated phrase in the national language, e.g., Friends of the Earth (US), Friends of the Earth (EWNI) (England Wales and Northern Ireland), Amigos de la Tierra (Spain and Argentina). However, roughly half of the member groups work under their own names, sometimes reflecting an independent origin and subsequent accession to the network, such as Korean Federation for Environmental Movement (KFEM), Environmental Rights Action (FOE Nigeria) and WALHI (FOE Indonesia).
Friends of the Earth International (FoEI) is supported by a secretariat based in Amsterdam, and an executive committee known as ExCom. The ExCom is elected by all member groups at a general meeting held every two years, and it is the ExCom which employs the secretariat. At the same general meeting, overall policies and priority activities are agreed.
In addition to work which is coordinated at the FoEI level, national member groups are free to carry out their own campaigns and to work bi- or multi-laterally as they see fit, as long as this does not go against agreed policy at the international level.
Diet for a Small Planet by Frances Moore Lappé, 1971
The Meat Atlas is an annual report on the methods and impact of industrial animal agriculture. The publication consists of 27 short essays and, with the help of graphs, visualises facts about the production and consumption of meat. The Meat Atlas is jointly published by Friends of the Earth and Heinrich Böll Foundation.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment, Working Group 2 report Friends of the Earth FoE February 2014
Ten key findings of the IPCC Working Group 3 report on climate mitigation
Mark Gordon, Wyoming state treasurer was his state's representative to Friends of the Earth board in the early 1980s.
Jay Kay, frontman of the funk/acid jazz group Jamiroquai, is known for donating a part of the profits earned from his album sales to Friends of the Earth and Oxfam, among other things.
Dominique Voynet, who ran in the 1995 and 2007 French presidential elections in the "les verts" parti, or Green Party, is a member.
Thom Yorke, lead singer of Radiohead, has publicly supported a number of Friends of the Earth campaigns.
A chorus of superstar voices on "Love Song to the Earth" — including Paul McCartney, Jon Bon Jovi, Sheryl Crow, Fergie, Sean Paul, and Colbie Caillat—join forces on this inspirational pop anthem. All proceeds from each sale of the single will be donated to Friends of the Earth U.S. and the United Nations Foundation.
Among those present at the launch of Friends of the Earth (EWNI)'s climate change campaign The Big Ask were: Jude Law, Edith Bowman, Siân Lloyd, Ross Burden, David Cameron, David Miliband, Thom Yorke, Stephen Merchant, Michael Eavis, and Emily Eavis.
Friends of the Earth Europe, Brussels
Young Friends of the Earth Europe, Brussels
Friends of the Earth – France, France
fr:Les AmiEs de la Terre de Québec, Canada
Amigos de la tierra, Spain
Bund für Umwelt und Naturschutz Deutschland, Germany
GLOBAL 2000, Austria [1]
Environmental Rights Action(FOE Nigeria)
Friends of the Earth Mozambique – Justica Ambiental (JA!)
Friends of the Earth (EWNI), England, Wales and Northern Ireland
Birmingham Friends of the Earth [2]
Friends of the Earth Canada
Friends of the Earth Scotland
Friends of the Earth (US)
Green Action, Croatia
Hnutí DUHA, Czech Republic
Milieudefensie, Netherlands
Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature, Norway
WALHI (FOE Indonesia)
Friends of the Earth Australia
Friends of the Earth Malta
Friends of the Earth Middle East
Amigu di Tera, Curaçao
Sobrevivencia – Amigos de la Tierra PY, Paraguay
AmiGoS dA TeRRa – BraSiL [3]
Magyar Természetvédok Szövetsége / Friends of the Earth Hungary [4]
Priatelia Zeme Slovensko (Friends of the Earth Slovakia) [5]
KFEM Korea Federation for Environmental Movements (Friends of the Earth South Korea) KFEM
Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Environmental Services, Inc.
Friends of the Earth International
Friends of the Earth Europe
Friends of the Earth Scotland
Les amis de la terre France
Les amiEs de la terre de Québec
Friends of the Earth Malta
Amigos de la Tierra Spain
Friends of the Earth Middle East
Friends of the Earth – Ibiza – (Catalan, Spanish, English, German)
Friends of the Earth Finland
Article on the French branch of Friends of the Earth "Multinationals : Ecologists See Red"
Young Friends of the Earth Europe
Friends of the Earth International YouTube channel
Brian Doherty and Timothy Doyle, Environmentalism, Resistance and Solidarity. The Politics of Friends of the Earth International (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2013). [6]
Jan-Henrik Meyer, “'Where do we go from Wyhl?' Transnational Anti-Nuclear Protest targeting European and International Organisations in the 1970s,” Historical Social Research 39: 1 (2014): 212-235. [7]
