Petar Toshev Mladenov (Bulgarian: Петър Тошев Младенов) (22 August 1936 – 31 May 2000) was a Bulgarian communist diplomat and politician. He was the last Communist leader of Bulgaria from 1989 to 1990, and briefly the first President of democratic Bulgaria in 1990.
Mladenov was born to a peasant family in the village of Toshevtsi, Vidin Province on 22 August 1936. His father was an anti-fascist partisan killed in action in 1944. He graduated from a military school, entered Sofia State University, and graduated from the Moscow State Institute of International Relations in 1963. Soon afterward, he joined the Bulgarian Communist Party.
Mladenov served as the first secretary of the party's committee in Vidin Province from 1969 to 1971. He joined the Politburo and became foreign minister in 1971, serving in that position for 18 years. In the same year, he was elected to the National Assembly. He was one of the closest associates to longtime leader Todor Zhivkov.
During the 1980s, he became attracted to Mikhail Gorbachev's reform efforts. He saw a chance to change Bulgaria's image as one of the most unreformed countries in the Soviet bloc. In May 1989, Zhivkov ordered the expulsion of most of Bulgaria's ethnic Turks. This brought near-unanimous international condemnation. Mladenov, who'd had to field most of the international complaints, was particularly upset because the expulsion violated an international human rights accord he'd signed four months earlier.
Several other top officials, including Defense Minister Dobri Dzhurov, Premier Georgi Atanasov and Finance Minister Andrey Lukanov, were also upset with Zhivkov over the expulsion. Along with Mladenov, they began plotting to overthow Zhivkov. Although Lukanov did most of the organizational work, it was decided that Mladenov would be the new party leader. At the yearly Warsaw Pact summit, he met with Mikhail Gorbachev and got his tacit support for removing Zhivkov.
In October 1989, Mladenov organized a 35-nation environmental conference and invited the Bulgarian NGO Ecoglasnost to participate. Ten days into the conference, several Ecoglasnost members were beaten up by the Darzhavna Sigurnost (secret police) and the militia on orders from Zhivkov. When Mladenov found out about it, he decided Zhivkov had to go.
On October 24, Mladenov resigned as foreign minister. His resignation letter was a scathing condemnation of Zhivkov's way of ruling the country. Suspecting that Zhivkov might try to kill him, he sent a copy of the letter to the entire Politburo, as well as to Gorbachev. On November 9, just after he returned from a trip to China, Mladenov and his colleagues forced Zhivkov to resign. He was then elected to Zhivkov's old posts as general secretary of the party and chairman of the state council. The latter post was equivalent to that of president.
Having seen the overthrow of the other Eastern Bloc governments, Mladenov embarked on a much more open government policy in hopes of bringing about change from above. He let it be known that he supported free elections, a greater role for the legislature and other reforms. Events, however, moved faster than he planned. Despite his promises of reforms, the people took to the streets almost every day to demand greater freedom. Bowing to the inevitable, on December 11 Mladenov announced in a nationally televised address that the Communist Party was abandoning power and a multi-party election would be held in the spring.
Although Communist rule had effectively ended with Mladenov's December 11 speech, it did not legally end until January 2, when the National Assembly amended the constitution to remove Article 1, which enshrined the Communist Party's leading role. A month later, on 2 February, in an effort to change the party's image, the office of general secretary was replaced by the office of party chairman. Alexander Lilov was chosen to take the new office. Mladenov's resignation as party leader removed the stigma of party interference in government. On 3 April the State Council was abolished, and was replaced by an executive presidency. Mladenov was elected as the first holder of this post by the National Assembly.
In April 1990, the Communist Party reorganized itself as a Western-style social democratic party, the Bulgarian Socialist Party.
Mladenov resigned as President in July 1990 after allegedly suggesting the use of tanks against anti-government demonstration in December 1989, securing a place in history with the phrase 'The tanks had better come' (Bulgarian: По-добре танковете да дойдат). He did not run in the 1990 elections and largely retired from public life.
Mladenov underwent a heart bypass in Houston in 1986, leaving him in frail health in the ensuing years. He died on 31 May 2000 in Sofia.
Petar Mladenov was married to Galya Mladenova, they have one daughter Tatyana Mladenova, a lawyer.
