Chitungwiza – known colloquially as Chi Town – is a high-density dormitory town in Zimbabwe. The city is approximately 30 kilometres south of the capital, Harare. It was formed in 1978 from three townships: Seke, Zengeza, and St Marys.
Chitungwiza is the largest high density suburb in Zimbabwe, it is popularly known for its hospital named Chitungwiza Central Hospital which is located in Zengeza 4 a suburb in Chitungwiza . Chitungwiza came into existence in the late 1970s with most black people who stayed in oldest high density towns like Highfield migrating to Chitungwiza. Chitungwiza has several suburbs. The oldest of the suburbs is St Mary's which is divided into two sections, Manyame Park (New St Mary's) and Old St Mary's, St Mary's is popularly known for being the oldest suburb in Chitown. There is Zengeza, which is divided into 5 sections i.e. Zengeza 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Zengeza 4 being relatively the largest section. There is also Seke another suburb located in Chtown and it is divided into many sections i.e. Unit A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, K, L, M, N, O AND P. There is a shopping mall in Chitungwiza which located between Seke (Unit D) and Zengeza(Zengeza 4) it is popularly known as Chitungwiza Town Centre. Some of the popular shopping centres in Chitungwiza include Makoni, Chikwanha, PaGomba, Pazvido, PaJambanja, Chigovanyika, Huruyadzo, PaDaddy,unit j shopping centre, Zengeza 2 shopping centre. Chitungwiza is also well known as home for some famous people in Zimbabwe including the late John Chibadura (Mr Chitungwiza), Charles Charamba, Prophet Emmanuel Makandiwa, Alick Macheso.
There is one main highway that connects the city to Harare which is in serious need of maintenance as of 2007. Public transport is composed of regular single level buses and more reliably minibus taxis (called emergency taxis locally). Chitungwiza has over 30 primary schools and over 25 secondary schools.
In terms of education, Chitungwiza has several schools some run by the local counci, some by government and a few privately owned. Among the schools you find Zengeza 1 High School, Seke 1 High School and Nyatsime College which each holds national records of both being the best result producers of the year. In higher education, Seke Teachers' College which opened its doors to the public in 1982 trains primary school teachers in the general course and Early Childhood Development. St Mary's ECD centre, the national model ECD centre is also found in Chitungwiza.
As compared to other countries in Africa, schools in this town are well built and of higher standards. except a few which are privately owned.
There are several public municipal clinics and privately owned surgeries which compliment the Chitungwiza Hospital efforts and another bigger hospital called South Medical or CitiMed as of present.
Chitungwiza's infrastructure is fast growing with private people Fradreck Mabamba, Sifra, Ngonidzashe Jiji and others building shopping malls and businesses premises. individuals are also building houses at a very fast pace. Prophet Emmanuel Makandiwa is building a multimillion-dollar mega Church between zengeza and Unit D
The Chitungwiza Aquatic Complex, built in 1995 for the All Africa Games, is no longer functional, and serves as a music venue.
Chitungwiza is located in the traditional territory of the Hera people. Its most distinguished historical figure is the Pasipamire, the pre-colonial svikiro (spirit medium) of Chaminuka. He is remembered for predicting the colonisation of the country by the British.
Johane Masowe we Chishanu is one of largest religion worshiping in the open spaces and vleis. Emmanuel Makandiwa of the United Family International Church has built the biggest church in Chitungwiza thereby bringing a huge transformation to Chitungwiza's infrastructure, he also is claimed to have the largest following of over hundred thousand members to date. Apostolic Faith Mission in Zimbabwe is also one of the largest churches with two provinces Chitungwiza East under the leadership of Overseer A Madawo and Chitungwiza West under the leadership of Overseer Dandure. The late renowned Overseer P.D. Chiweshe was also a pastor of AFM at Seke Assembly for 23 years.
The economy is supported by informal trade, residents earn a living through selling green groceries at informal markets such as Chikwanha, Jambanja and Huruyadzo. Art has proven to be among the highest contributors of income in Chitungwiza, many musicians come from Chitungwiza with the well known ones being Alick Macheso, Nicholas Zacharia, Mechanic Manyeruke, Amos and Micah Mahendere, Dhadza D, Guspy Warrior, Nill Jay, Job Mashanda, the late Dembo, the late Marshall Munhumumwe, the late System Tazvida, the late Cephas Mashakada, the late John Chibadura who was nicknamed Mr. Chitungwiza among others. It is also the home of Chitungwiza Harmony singers, a choral outfit that was founded by the late Israel Dzangare, a young brother to the late Overseer Chiweshe.
Apart from performing Artists and Musicians, Chitungwiza has produced great visual artists particularly in Shona Stone Sculpture. World-renowned Sculptors like Nesbert Mukomberanwa, Sylvester Mubayi, Willard Chiwawa and the late Fanizani Akuda are products of Chitungwiza.
Chitungwiza Art Centre was established in 1997 to facilitate the growth of the visual arts industry, art promoters like AVAC Arts have created a platform for artists to market and sale their artworks internationally through website www.avacarts.com.
Chitungwiza gained full municipal status in 1996 and is the third-largest and the fastest-growing urban centre in Zimbabwe. According to the 2002 Population Census, the city had a population of 321,782. However, its true population is closer to one million. Most of the people work in Harare, as there is very little industry in Chitungwiza. There are growth points (an urban area with limited tax breaks) there and bus ranks. The Chitungwiza City Council is dominated by the opposition Movement for Democratic Change.
Chitungwiza was one of the areas targeted by Operation Murambatsvina in 2005 in which many residents lost their homes and businesses.
Like many of Zimbabwe's major cities, Chitungwiza is in a serious water supply crisis.
