European route E 6 is the designation for the main north-south road in Norway, and the west coast of Sweden, running from the southern tip of Sweden, at Trelleborg, into Norway and through almost all of the country north to Finnmark. The route ends in Kirkenes close to the Russian border. Its length is 3,140 km (1,950 mi).
This road was called E 6 in the old "E" road system before 1985 and previously continued to Rome. It was given the number E 47 (but not signposted) in the new system on most of the Scandinavian part (Helsingborg–Olderfjord), and E 6 only for the northernmost 460 km (290 mi) (from Olderfjord in Finnmark). After a political negotiation all of the Scandinavian part was given the number E 6 also in the new system which was introduced in Scandinavia 1992.
From south to north, E 6 follows the route Trelleborg, Malmö, Helsingborg, Halmstad, Gothenburg, Svinesund in Sweden, then crossing the border into Norway, where the road goes through Halden, Sarpsborg, Moss, Oslo, Gardermoen, Hamar, Lillehammer, Dombås, Oppdal, Melhus, Trondheim, Stjørdal, Verdal, Steinkjer, Grong, Mosjøen, Mo i Rana, Saltdal, Fauske, then further up to Hamarøy with a ferry from Bognes to Skarberget then on via Narvik, Setermoen, Nordkjosbotn, Skibotn, Alta, Olderfjord, Lakselv, Karasjok, Varangerbotn, and Kirkenes, where the road terminates just east of the town center.
The road E 6 is a 2+2 lane motorway from outside Trelleborg to Kolomoen south of Hamar, about 690 km. The Swedish E6 motorway and the Norwegian motorway up to Kolomoen were completed in 2015. This motorway is also connected to central Europe by uninterrupted motorway (via E20). Some stretches further north also have four lanes or motorway standard. The rest of the road is ordinary road, usually 6–10 m wide. Some parts in the north of Norway are less than 6 m (20 ft) wide, making it very tight when heavy vehicles meet. It is also often very curvy, at least on the northern half, north of Trondheim. The road E 6 passes over treeless mountain passes in a few places in Norway. In the winter the weather conditions often can be so rough there (snow storm) that the road must be closed temporarily.
Between Trelleborg and Kirkenes, there is a more than 800 km (500 mi) shorter route using E4 and E75, among the longest detour any European route has. Especially to and in Finnmark there are several options between two places along the E6 that are shorter than following E6.
