Samarinda International Airport (IATA: SRI, ICAO: WALS) is a main airport under construction in Samarinda, East Borneo. It is in the district of Sungai Siring. It is colloquially known as Sungai Siring Airport, to distinguish it from its predecessor, Temindung Airport.
The airport will replace Temindung Airport, and will be an important regional transportation centre, passenger hub and gateway for destinations in Nusantara (with 15 destinations). It will be East Kalimantan's busiest cargo gateway and busiest passenger airport. It is also home to Kaltim's largest passenger terminal buildings.
The airport will be operated by Airport Authority Samarinda 24 hours a day and is the primary hub for Kaltim Airlines (the flag carrier of Samarinda). SRIA is an important contributor to Samarinda's economy. About 6 airlines will operate flights from the airport to 15 cities across Indonesia. SRIA will handle 5,000,000 passengers.
Sungai Siring Airport was designed as a replacement for the former Samarinda International Airport (commonly known as Temindung Airport) originally built in 1973. Located in the densely built-up Sei Pinang District with a single runway extending into settlements, Temindung had only limited room for expansion to cope with steadily increasing air traffic. By the 2000s, Temindung had become one of Kaltim's busiest airports – it far exceeded its annual passenger and cargo design capacities. One out of every 25 flights experienced delays, largely due to lack of space for aircraft, gates, and runway.
A 1992 planning study by Civil Aviation and Public Works departments identified the district of Sungai Siring, as a possible airport replacement site. Away from the congested city centre, flight paths would be routed over North Samarinda rather than populous urban areas, enabling efficient round-the-clock operation of multiple runways. The Sungai Siring (SGS) airport master plan was completed in 1995. In 1998, however, the government shelved the project for financial and economic reasons. The Airport Location Study was undertaken by Indonesian consultants. This study came up with four recommended locations for overall strategic development in Samarinda. One of the four assumed a new airport at Makroman; a second assumed a new airport at Palaran; the third assumed a new airport at Sungai Siring; and the fourth assumed a new airport at Bayur. In November 2003 the Governor of Kaltim announced that a decision had been made on the Airport Location Study. The strategy was a replacement airport at Sungai Siring.
The consultants advised that the earliest the airport could be opened was June 2009. However, in reaching the government's decision, this date was modified to December 2007. Construction of the new airport began in 2005.
The construction period was very slow; specialists considered only 2–3-year period was sufficient for this aviation project. There was uncertain future of the airport construction after Panitia Pengadaan BSB manipulated the nomination of PT NCR as the contractor. It was originally believed that BPKP preferred to keep everything investigated and minimise financial commitments for the project temporarily, therefore stopping all construction. In practice, the airport did not finish in time for the investigation. However, Kaltim gave an additional year's deadline.
Construction of the new airport was only part of the MP3EI Master Plan, which also involved construction of new road and rail links to the airport. The detailed design for the airport terminal was awarded to a consortium led by Waskita Karya with Airmas Asri as specialist designers for airport related aspects. Project architects were PT Waskita Karya.
Samarinda International Airport covers an area of 470 hectares (1.8 sq mi). The airport has 4 boarding gates, with four jet bridge gates. All jet bridges are capable of handling the Airbus A320.
Terminal 1 of the SRIA, is large with an area measuring 16,468 m2 (177,260 sq ft).
The airport is operated by the Airport Authority Samarinda, a statutory body wholly owned by the Government of Kaltim. The airport has one runway, which is 3,000 metres (9,800 ft) in length and 60 metres (200 ft) wide. The runway allows pilot to land in only 800-metre (2,600 ft) visibility and has a capacity of over 75 aircraft movements per day.
The airport provides search and rescue services, medical evacuation and general purpose flight for the Government.
The Samarinda VVIP Centre has its own terminal and facilities separate from the public terminal. It provides a full range of services for executive aircraft and passengers.
The airport operates one 1,200-square-metre (13,000 sq ft) air cargo terminal on site. Both line and base maintenance services will be undertaken by PT Lion Mentari Airlines (LION).
The Air Traffic Control Complex (ATCX), next to the hangar, is the nerve centre of the air traffic control system. The Airport Meteorological Office (AMO) provides weather services for the aviation community. Rescue and fire fighting services within the airport are covered by Airport Fire Contingent (PKP PK).
The airport is connected to inner Samarinda by the North Samarinda Road.
Damri will operate some bus routes to the airport from various parts of Samarinda. The airport will be reached by Samarinda Rail, a dedicated rail link provided by Samarinda Government.
Temindung Airport
