European route E 30 is an A-Class West-East European route, extending from the southern Irish port of Cork in the west to the Russian city of Omsk in the east. For much of its Russian stretch, it coincides with Trans-Siberian Highway and, east of the Ural Mountains, with AH6 of the Asian Highway Network, which continues to Busan, South Korea. This route is approximately 6,500 kilometres (4,000 mi).
The E 30 is one of the longest European routes with a total length of about 5,800 km (3,600 mi)—3,300 km (2,100 mi) from Cork to Moscow, and 2,500 km (1,600 mi) from Moscow to Omsk. The naming is by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe.
Formerly the route only went from Cork to Samara, with an often reported length of 4,912 km (3,052 mi).
Formerly, before 1985, this was the E 8 (London–Berlin–Brest).
 Ireland
 Cork () –Waterford – Wexford () – Rosslare
Gap
:  Rosslare -  Fishguard
 United Kingdom
Although the United Kingdom Government participates fully in activities concerning the E-routes, E-routes are not signposted within the United Kingdom.
 Fishguard – Carmarthen
 Carmarthen – Llanelli
 Llanelli – Swansea – Cardiff – Newport – Newbury () – Slough
 Slough - Watford () - Greater London () – Brentwood
 Brentwood – Chelmsford – Colchester () –Ipswich ()
 Ipswich () – Felixstowe
The nearest passenger ferries to Hoek van Holland actually depart from Harwich, across the Orwell south of Felixstowe. That ferry has 2 daily departures, one is a day crossing, the other a night crossing, both taking about 7–8 hours. It carries foot (train) passengers as well as cars, buses, caravans and freight lorries. Ferries departing from Felixstowe carry freight only.
Gap
:  Harwich -  Hoek van Holland
 The Netherlands
 Hoek van Holland () – Den Haag
 Den Haag ()
 Den Haag () – Gouda (Start of concurrency with )– Utrecht (, End of Concurrency with )
 Utrecht ()
 Utrecht – Amersfoort ()
 Amersfoort () – Borne
 Borne
 Borne - Oldenzaal
 Germany
  Bad Bentheim – Osnabrück () – Bünde – Bad Oeynhausen
  Bad Oeynhausen
  Bad Oeynhausen ()
  Bad Oeynhausen () – Hanover () – Magdeburg ( - Potsdam ()
  Potsdam () - Berlin () - Königs Wusterhausen ()
  Königs Wusterhausen () - Frankfurt an der Oder
 Poland
 Świecko - Świebodzin () - Poznań () - Łódź () - Łowicz Warsaw ( )
 Warsaw ( )
 Warsaw - Sulejówek () - Mińsk Mazowiecki
 Mińsk Mazowiecki
 Mińsk Mazowiecki - Siedlce - Biała Podlaska - Wólka Dobryńska - Terespol
 Wólka Dobryńska - Kukuryki
 Belarus
 Brest - Kobryn (Start of Concurrency with ) - Ivatsevichy (End of Concurrency with ) - Baranavichy - Minsk (, Towards ) - Barysaw - Orsha () - Dubroŭna
 Russia
 Smolensk - Moscow
 Moscow ()
 Moscow – Ryazan – Penza – Samara () – Ufa () –Chelyabinsk ()
 (Formerly ) Chelyabinsk ( – Kurgan – Ishim ()
 Ishim () - Omsk ()
The Russian stretch of this road coincides partly with the Asian Highway Network's AH6 (though this latter highway passes through Petropavl, Kazakhstan in its stretch between Chelyabinsk and Omsk, unlike the E 30). The E 30 follows the Russian main road M1 Belarus-Moscow, M5 Moscow-Chelyabinsk and M51 Chelyabinsk-Kurgan. It goes along minor roads past Ishim to avoid the Kazak border towards Omsk.
In the years 1988-1994, a travel agency in the Netherlands, called E30, organized trips with a camper-touring car along the E30, starting at Utrecht and with stops in Berlin, Warsaw, Minsk, Smolensk and end destination Moscow.
Category:Constituent roads of European route E30
