Fenchurch Street, also known as London Fenchurch Street, is a central London railway terminus in the southeastern corner of the City of London. Trains run on the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway (LTSR) towards East London and south Essex, managed by c2c.
The original station opened in 1841 to serve the London and Blackwall Railway, and was rebuilt in 1854 after merging with the Eastern Counties Railway to form the LTSR. Further upgrades occurred when the Great Eastern Railway was created by amalgamating various companies, and the station became an overspill for some services to nearby Liverpool Street Station, which had become increasingly congested. The station came under ownership of the London, Midland and Scottish Railway following the Railways Act 1921, and was rebuilt in 1935. The line from the station was electrified in 1961, and controversially closed for seven weeks in 1994.
The station is one of the smallest railway termini in London in terms of platforms but one of the most intensively operated. It does not have a direct interchange with the London Underground, and plans to connect it stalled in the early 1980s because of the lack of progress on the Jubilee Line. However, it is close to some stations, such as Tower Hill tube station.
The station is on Fenchurch Place and adjacent to Fenchurch Street in the City of London. The station has two entrances: one located on Fenchurch Place and another on Cooper's Row, near Tower Hill. It has four platforms arranged on two islands elevated on a viaduct. The station has been Grade II listed since 1972 and the conference venue One America Square is built adjacent to it. Formerly run by Network Rail, the station has been served by c2c, owned by National Express since 1996, who have a franchise to run services until 2029.
Unlike other terminal stations in London, Fenchurch Street does not have a corresponding Underground tube connection, the nearest being Tower Hill around 0.2 miles (0.32 km) to the southeast and Aldgate around 0.3 miles (0.48 km) to the northeast. London Buses route 40 serves the station.
Services from Fenchurch Street run towards East London and south Essex, including Barking, Upminster, Chafford Hundred Lakeside (for Lakeside Shopping Centre), Basildon, Southend Central and Shoeburyness. The typical off-peak service consists of eight trains per hour (tph):
During peak periods services are increased from 8 tph to 20 tph.
Though the station's capacity is small compared to other London terminals, it has a high footfall, averaging around 16 million passengers annually. A report in 2001 showed approximately 3,000 people commuted daily from Castle Point to the city via Fenchurch Street.
The area around Fenchurch Street is one of the oldest inhabited parts of London; the name "Fenchurch" derives from the Latin faenum (hay) and refers to hay markets in that area. The station was the first to be granted permission by the Corporation of London to be constructed inside the City of London, following several refusals against other railway companies.
The original building was designed by William Tite and opened on 20 July 1841, serving the London and Blackwall Railway (L&BR), replacing a nearby terminus named Minories that had opened in July 1840. It had two platforms connected via a stairway to the booking hall. The original station did not use steam-powered engines until 1849; prior to this, trains were dragged uphill from Blackwall to Minories, and then run on to Fenchurch Street via their own momentum. The reverse journey back eastwards required a manual push from railway staff. The station was the location of the first railway bookstall in the City of London, established in 1841 by William Marshall.
Following the opening of the London and Blackwall Extension Railway on 2 April 1849, services started to operate from Fenchurch Street to Bow & Bromley. Some services were extended to Victoria Park & Bow where an interchange existed with the Eastern Counties Railway (ECR) from Bishopsgate.
On 26 September 1850, the East and West India Docks and Birmingham Junction Railway (renamed the North London Railway (NLR) on 1 January 1853) started operating a service from Bow into Fenchurch Street and the L&BR withdrew their service, closing the line between Gasworks Junction and Bow & Bromley. The station now had two heavily used platforms with a double track line from Stepney onwards. Following a reduced income at Blackwall (the South Eastern Railway had opened a direct line from Gravesend), LBR shareholders voted to align with the ECR and jointly construct the London, Tilbury and Southend Railway (LTSR) from Tilbury to Forest Gate Junction (near Maryland Point). Services would then split at Stratford, with one service being routed to Bishopsgate and the other to Fenchurch Street along the reopened line via Bow & Bromley (although that station did not reopen). To accommodate this service a third line was started between Stepney and Fenchurch Street which was also being enlarged at this time. The new service commenced on 13 April 1854 using ECR locomotives and stock.
The station was rebuilt to accommodate these changes. It was designed by George Berkley and featured a 32 metres (105 ft) by 91 metres (299 ft) trussed-arch vaulted roof. Two additional platforms were added at the same time time as well as a circulating area for L&BR and LTSR traffic. The NLR, wanting its own London terminus instead of co-sharing Fenchurch Street, extended their railway towards the new Broad Street station in 1865.
The railway through Stratford was unable to cope with the extra services, so the LTSR planned to build a more direct line from Barking to Gas Works Junction. The third track from Stepney to Fenchurch Street was opened in 1856, followed by the direct line from Barking in 1858. LTSR services were then diverted way from Stratford and a spur was also opened at Abbey Mills Junction (just east of Bromley) which allowed services to and from North Woolwich to operate directly from Fenchurch Street instead of via Stratford.
By the 1860s the railways in East Anglia were in financial trouble, and most lines were leased to the ECR. Although they wished to amalgamate formally, they could not obtain government agreement for this until 1862, when the Great Eastern Railway (GER) was formed. In the 1870s, the flat awning over the station main's entrance was replaced with the current zig-zag canopy.
The track layout at the station was rearranged in 1883 and a fifth platform was added for use by the Blackwall services. The GER used the station as an alternative to Liverpool Street station during the late 19th and early 20th century over the routes of the former ECR. The GER took over operation of the NLR shuttle from Bow in 1869, which it operated until 1892. It was then re-sited along with a passenger connection to the NLR station. Subsequent services into Fenchurch Street were operated by the GER and the LTSR, and three years later the viaduct from Stepney to Fenchurch Street was widened to accommodate a fourth track. In 1903, the GER built the Fairlop Loop, a short connecting line between Ilford and Woodford; while most services from there ran to Liverpool Street, around 36 trains a day ran to Fenchurch Street from Woodford.
In 1912 the Midland Railway (MR) bought and took over operation of the LTSR services. After the Railways Act 1921 the country's railways were grouped into four main companies. At Fenchurch Street, the London, Midland and Scottish Railway (LMSR) took over operations of the MR whilst GER services were taken over by the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER). Direct trains to Gallions were usually routed via Bromley at off-peak hours, while there was a peak shuttle service from Custom House to Gallions. Passengers for the North Greenwich branch changed at Millwall Junction. The Blackwall and North Greenwich passenger services were scheduled for closure on 30 June 1926 but the general strike brought that forward to 3 May.
The station was rebuilt in 1935 to address overcrowding and to provide better accommodation of the Southend line. When the former ECR lines transferred to the Underground's Central line in 1948 the former LTSR services became the sole user of the station.
British Railways began to electrify the former LTSR line from Fenchurch Street in 1959. Electric services began on 6 November 1961 and a full electric timetable was introduced on 18 June the following year. In the 1980s, the old passenger roof was dismantled and replaced by a series of high-rise office blocks, though the 1854 facade survived.
In July 1994, shortly before privatisation, Fenchurch Street station closed for seven weeks as part of an £83 million project to replace signals, track and electrification works. The scheme was criticised in Parliament as it was first significant closure of a London terminal station. Teresa Gorman, Member of Parliament for Billericay, called the line from Fenchurch Street "one of the disgraces of our public railway service for many years".
In the 1970s Fenchurch Street was considered an integral part of the proposed Fleet line (now called the Jubilee line), which would have given the station a proper Underground connection. An extension from the end of the existing track terminus at Charing Cross to Fenchurch Street via Aldwych and Ludgate Circus would then have seen the line cross the River Thames and continue southeastwards towards Surrey Docks and Lewisham.
Mott, Hay and Anderson and Sir William Halcrow and Partners began constructing the line to Charing Cross, but did not finish the project until 1979. Rising costs and high inflation led to London Transport abandoning the eastwards extension via Fenchurch Street in 1981. It was eventually completed in 1999, using a different route via the Greenwich Peninsula to Stratford, crossing the LTSR line from Fenchurch Street at West Ham.
On 1 August 1859, two trains were involved in a low-speed head-on collision at Fenchurch Street after an arriving North Woolwich service erroneously passed a red signal and struck a stationary Tilbury Riverside service. No-one was injured.
On 28 November 1860, a service to Benfleet via Hornchurch and Tilbury Riverside had a track defect causing the first four carriages of a departing train to leave the line at low speed. No-one was injured.
On 24 June 1872, a service arriving from Bow came into collision with the buffers at the platform end at Fenchurch Street, resulting in injury to three passengers.
On 17 August 1872, two people were injured when their service collided with an empty train being shunted out of a siding.
On 2 September 1903, 11 passengers and one crew member were injured when a train hit the buffers as it arrived at Fenchurch Street from Benfleet via Tilbury Riverside and Hornchurch .
On 9 March 1908, a point cleaner working near the station suffered an injury. A Board of Trade enquiry the following month criticised the lack of look-out facilities for railway workers.
On 3 February 1912, approximately 86 people were injured when a train hit the buffers as it arrived at Fenchurch Street from Westcliff via Tilbury Riverside and Hornchurch. It was estimated that 860 passengers were aboard at the time. Driver error and excessive speed were blamed for the incident.
On 26 January 1927, 10 people were injured in a head-on collision on a train to Westcliff via Hornchurch and Tilbury Riverside and subsequent derailment caused by defects in the signal detection and signals at Fenchurch Street.
The approaches to Fenchurch Street were home to a number of goods depots established because of the proximity of the City of London. The following table lists the various depots which were located between Fenchurch street and Christian Street Junction just east of Leman Street:
The poet John Betjeman enjoyed visiting Fenchurch Street station on day-trips to Southend, describing it as a "delightful hidden old terminus". Fenchurch Street is one of the four railway stations featured on the standard UK Monopoly board. The others are Liverpool Street, Marylebone and King's Cross. All four are former LNER terminal stations.
The first documented murder on the British rail network occurred on 9 July 1864, when Franz Muller murdered Thomas Briggs shortly after a train left Fenchurch Street station en route to Chalk Farm.
In the 2005 film Green Street, Fenchurch Street is used to represent Manchester Piccadilly station. In the Douglas Adams novel So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish, Fenchurch is a girl named after the station as she was conceived there.
