The Istanbul Metro (Turkish: İstanbul Metrosu) is a rapid transit railway network that serves the city of Istanbul, Turkey. It is operated by İstanbul Ulaşım (Istanbul Transport), a public enterprise, controlled by the Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality. The oldest section is the metro is M1 line, which opened in 1989; it now includes 70 stations in service, with 74 more under construction.
The system currently consists of five lines named M1, M2, M3, M4, and the M6 Mini-Metro. More lines are under construction or planned: M5 (Üsküdar-Çekmeköy/Sancaktepe), M8 (Bostancı-Dudullu) will be on the Asian side, while M7 (Kabataş-Mahmutbey), M9 (Ataköy-İkitelli) will be on the European side.
The oldest underground urban rail line in Istanbul is the Tünel, which entered service on January 17, 1875. It is the world's second-oldest underground urban rail line after the London Underground which was built in 1863, and the first underground urban rail line in continental Europe.
The first master plan for a full metro network in Istanbul, titled Avant Projet d'un Métropolitain à Constantinople and conceived by the French engineer L. Guerby, dates to January 10, 1912. The plan comprised a total of 24 stations between the Topkapı and Şişli districts and included a connection through the Golden Horn. Each station would have a 75-metre platform next to the rail line, while the distance between stations varied from 220 to 975 metres. The blueprints of the project, which was never realized, are today displayed at the Istanbul Technical University Museum.
In 1936 the French urban planner Henri Prost proposed a metro network between the districts of Taksim and Beyazıt, to the north and south of the Golden Horn, respectively. In October 1951 the Dutch firm Nedeco proposed a similar route between Taksim and Beyazıt, and in September 1952 the Director of the Paris Transportation Department, Marc Langevin, prepared a 14-chapter report together with his associate Louis Meizzonet for the implementation of the project and its integration with the other means of public transportation in the city. However, these plans never came into effect and all proposals were put on hold until 1987, when the planning for the current Istanbul Metro was made.
Construction works for the first 'modern' mass transit railway system started in 1989. The M1 was initially called "Hafif Metro" (which literally translates as "light metro"). Although it was built as a fully grade separated line, the M1 line operates with shorter trainsets and shorter station platforms than is standard on a traditional metro line, hence its "light metro" designation. The M1 line was later extended from Aksaray towards the western suburbs, reaching Atatürk Airport in the southwest in 2002. Construction of the M2, began on September 11, 1992, but faced many challenges due to the numerous archaeological sites that were discovered during the drilling process, which slowed down or fully stopped the construction of many stations especially at south. Taking into account the seismic activity in Istanbul, the entire network was built with the cut-and-cover method to withstand an earthquake of up to 9.0 on the Richter magnitude scale.
The first section between Taksim and 4. Levent entered service, after some delays, on September 16, 2000. This line is 8.5 km (5.3 mi) long and has 6 stations, which all look similar but are in different colours. In 2000, there were 8 Alstom-built 4-car train sets in service, which ran every 5 minutes on average and transported 130,000 passengers daily. On January 30, 2009, the first train sets built by Eurotem entered service. Eurotem will build a total of 92 new wagons for the M2 line. As of January 30, 2009, a total of 34 trainsets, each with 4 cars, were being used on the M2 line. A northern extension from 4. Levent to Maslak was opened on January 30, 2009. On September 2, 2010 the northern (temporary) terminus Darüşşafaka followed. The southern extension of the M2 line from Taksim to Yenikapı, across the Golden Horn via Haliç station on the bridge and underground through the historic peninsula, entered service on 15 February 2014. The Taksim-Yenikapı extension is 5.2 km long, with four stations. The total cost of the extension was $593 million. At Yenikapı it will intersect with the extended light metro and the suburban train lines.
The trip between the Şişhane station in Beyoğlu and the Haciosman station in Maslak is 20 km (12.4 mi) long and takes 27 minutes; including Şişhane - Taksim (1.65 km, 2 minutes), Taksim - 4. Levent (8.5 km, 12 minutes), and 4. Levent - Haciosman (8.1 km, 12 minutes.) The total length of the European side of the M2 line will reach 23 km (14.3 mi) when all 16 stations from Hacıosman to Yenikapı will be completed; not including the 936 metres long Golden Horn Metro Bridge, the 0.6 km long Taksim-Kabataş tunnel connection with the Seabus port, the 0.6 km long Yenikapı-Aksaray tunnel connection for the M1 line, and the 13.6 km long Marmaray tunnel.
On the Asian side, construction is in progress of the remaining portion of the 26.5 km (16.5 mi) long M4 line from Kadıköy to Kaynarca, yielding a total of 19 stations. It cost € 751 million and was built by the Astaldi / Makyol / Gülermak consortium. The first section opened on August 17, 2012, terminating in Kartal. Construction of the 20 km (12.4 mi) long M5 (Istanbul Metro) line from Üsküdar via Ümraniye to Sancaktepe started in March 2012. The Marmaray tunnel (Bosphorus undersea railway tunnel) connecting the Asian and European metro lines opened on October 29, 2013.
The Metro operates from 06:00 a.m. to 00.00 a.m. every 7–10 minutes. M2 Yenikapı - Haciosman operates from 06:15 a.m. to 00.00 a.m. line During peak-hours the intervals reduce to 2 minutes. There is a flat fare – 2.15 TL (4 TL with token), paid in tokens (which are also valid on the funicular, modern tram, buses and trans-Bosporus ferry boats). Akbil tickets/cards are also valid, which is the most popular method for long distance traveling. The Akbil ticket is valid on all metros, trams, funiculars, ferry boats and buses. Ferryboat and bus fares are not flat, so the price of this transfer ticket also varies depending on the distance to be covered on bus or ferryboat.
This table lists the metro lines currently in service on the Istanbul Metro. An additional three lines are under-construction or planned.
There is also a commuter rail line that connects the European and Asian segments of the Istanbul metro:
The following stations are served by both the M1A and M1B branch lines:
Yenikapı (transfer to: M2, Marmaray, İDO)
Aksaray (transfer to: T1)
Emniyet - Fatih
Topkapı - Ulubatlı (transfer to: T4)
Bayrampaşa - Maltepe
Sağmalcılar
Kocatepe
Otogar (Coach Station)
M1A branch line
Terazidere
Davutpaşa - YTÜ
Merter (transfer to: Metrobus)
Zeytinburnu (transfer to: T1, Metrobus)
Bakırköy - İncirli (transfer to: M3)
Bahçelievler (transfer to: Metrobus)
Ataköy - Şirinevler (transfer to: Metrobus)
Yenibosna (transfer to: M9)
DTM - İstanbul Fuar Merkezi (Expo Center)
Atatürk Havalimanı (Airport)
M1B branch line
Esenler
Menderes
Üçyüzlü
Bağcılar - Meydan (transfer to: T1)
Kirazlı (transfer to: M3)
Hacıosman
Darüşşafaka
Atatürk Oto Sanayi
İTÜ - Ayazağa
Sanayi Mahallesi
4. Levent
Levent (transfer to: M6)
Gayrettepe (transfer to: Metrobus)
Şişli - Mecidiyeköy (transfer to: Metrobus, M7)
Osmanbey
Taksim (transfer to: T2, F1)
Şişhane (transfer to: Tünel, T2)
Haliç (Golden Horn)
Vezneciler (transfer to: T1)
Yenikapı (transfer to: Marmaray, M1A & M1B, İDO)
The route splits to form a short one-station spur line at the Sanayi Mahallesi station to the following station:
Seyrantepe
MetroKent (Başakşehir)
Başak Konutları
Siteler
Turgut Özal
İkitelli Sanayi (transfer to: M9)
İstoç
Mahmutbey (transfer to: M7)
Yenimahalle
Kirazlı (transfer to: M1B)
The route splits to form a 'Y' at the İkitelli Sanayi station with the western branch line traveling to the following two northwesterly stations:
Ziya Gökalp Mahallesi
Olimpiyat
Levent (transfer to: M2)
Nispetiye
Etiler
Boğaziçi Üniversitesi (Hisarüstü)
Kadıköy (transfer to: T3, İDO)
Ayrılık Çeşmesi (transfer to: Marmaray)
Acıbadem
Ünalan (transfer to: Metrobus)
Göztepe
Yenisahra
Kozyatağı (transfer to: M8)
Bostancı
Küçükyalı
Maltepe
Huzurevi
Gülsuyu
Esenkent
Hastane - Adliye
Soğanlık
Kartal
Yakacık (under construction)
Pendik (under construction)
Kaynarca (under construction)
M1
Traction: Overhead line wire
Gauge: 1,435 mm (4 ft 8 1⁄2 in)
M2
Traction: Sidebar electrification
Gauge: 1,435 mm
M3
Traction: Overhead line wire
Gauge: 1,435 mm
M4
Traction: Rigid catenary electrification
Gauge: 1,435 mm
M6
Traction: Sidebar electrification
Gauge: 1,435 mm
The lines are fully underground and have no connection between them. All station names are on the bus lines as well.
The M2 Line has an interchange between F1 in Taksim and a new interchange tunnel is almost finished between Zincirlikuyu Metrobus station and Gayrettepe station. When the line is completed, there will be an interchange at the Yenikapı Marmaray station and İDO Ferry Port; from where it is possible to take the high-speed catamaran Seabus for going to Bursa, Bandırma or Yalova; as well as the other Seabus ports in İstanbul such as Bostancı, Kadıköy, Bakırköy, and Kabataş.
The M4 Line has a vapur (traditional ferry), motorboat, İDO and nostalgic tram interchange at Kadıköy which is the heart of İstanbul's Asian side. When Ayrılıkçeşme Station Complex's construction is finished, Marmaray and M4 will meet here. Also at Ünalan / Uzunçayır, the line has a Metrobus interchange just like Gayrettepe in M2.
Although line M1 is a (light) metro line, its rolling stock—in use since 1989—is made up of typical ABB light rail vehicles (LRVs). These are partly the same as those used on the T4 tramway line.
The first Istanbul full metro rolling stocks, which entered service on September 16, 2000 on the Taksim - 4. Levent line, were built by Alstom. These trains are air conditioned and equipped with LCD screens. On January 30, 2009, the first 8 trains (each with 4 wagons) built by Eurotem (the Turkish factory of Hyundai Rotem) entered service. Today the system has 268 trains. These trains are also air conditioned and equipped with LCD screens, as well as dynamic route map showing the location and direction of the train.
In September 2009, CAF signed a contract to supply 144 units for the İstanbul metro (M4), amounting to 1.156.159 euros. These metro units, each consisting of 4 cars, with a total length per unit of 90 meters and a maximum transport capacity of 1300 passengers.
M3 metro line extension 
Bakırköy–Kirazlı metro line. Under Construction.
M7 metro line 
The M7 Kabataş-Mahmutbey metro line is under construction. On December 20, 2013, the line was commissioned to Kalyon Group for construction. The groundbreaking ceremony was held on February 9, 2014. The line will be 24.5 km (15.2 mi) long with 19 stations, and is expected to go into service in 2018.
M9 metro line 
M9 Ataköy-İkitelli:
Ataköy (under construction)
Yenibosna (under construction)
Çobançeşme (under construction)
Kuyumcukent (under construction)
Doğu Sanayi (under construction)
Mimar Sinan Avenue (under construction)
Evren District (under construction)
İkitelli Junction (under construction)
Mehmet Akif (under construction)
Bahariye (under construction)
MASKO (under construction)
İkitelli Sanayi (under construction)
The Üsküdar–Beykoz metro line will run parallel to the Bosporus shoreline.
M4 metro line 
M4 Kadıköy–Kartal is being extended, and will eventually connect Sabiha Gökçen International Airport:
Yakacık (under construction)
Pendik (under construction)
Tavşantepe (under construction)
Hastane (under construction)
Şeyhli (under construction)
Kurtköy (under construction)
Sabiha Gökçen International Airport (under construction)
M5 metro line 
M5 Üsküdar-Çekmeköy:
Üsküdar (under construction)
Fıstıkağacı (under construction)
Bağlarbaşı (under construction)
Altunizade (under construction)
Kısıklı (under construction)
Bulgurlu (under construction)
Ümraniye (under construction)
Çarşı (under construction)
Yamanevler (under construction)
Çakmak (under construction)
Ihlamur Kuyu (under construction)
Altınşehir (under construction)
İmam Hatip (under construction)
Dudullu (under construction)
Necip Fazıl (under construction)
Çekmeköy (under construction)
M8 metro line 
M8 Bostancı-Dudullu:
Bostancı İDO (under construction)
Suadiye (under construction)
Upper Bostancı (under construction)
Kozyatağı (under construction)
Küçükbakkalköy (under construction)
İçerenköy (under construction)
Kayışdağı (under construction)
Türkiş Blocks (under construction)
İMES (under construction)
MODOKO (under construction)
Dudullu (under construction)
Upper Dudullu (under construction)
Depot (under construction)
Marmaray
Istanbul modern tramways
Istanbul nostalgic tramways
Trams in Istanbul
Tünel
Public transport in Istanbul
