Paris Métro Line 11 is one of 16 Paris métro lines. It links Les Lilas in the North East of the city to Châtelet in the center of Paris. It is the shortest of the 14 metro lines having independent management (those of lines 3bis and 7bis are managed respectively by those of lines 3 and 7). It is the thirteenth busiest line on the network.
Unlike most Paris Métro lines, line 11 was not included in the original late 19th century scheme. It was built in the 1930s to replace the former Belleville funicular tramway. It was intended to create a more effective transportation system which could handle the increasing traffic on the route and to extend it to the center of Paris, at Châtelet.
29 December 1922: Paris council voted for the creation of a new metro line which would replace the Belleville funicular and which would be extended to Châtelet.
28 April 1935: Line 11 was inaugurated from Châtelet to Porte des Lilas.
17 February 1937: The line was extended from Porte des Lilas to Mairie des Lilas.
8 November 1956: The rails were adapted to allow for rubber-tyred trains.
Being the first metro line to be converted to rubber-tyred pneumatic operation, the first set of rubber-tyred rolling stock to be in service on Line 11 was the MP 55, which operated from October 1956 through January 1999. They were then replaced by refurbished MP 59 stock from Line 4. The MP 55 stock consisted of 4 carriages, as well as the current MP 59 stock. One MP 73 of line 6 is in service on the 11 as well.
The future of the MP 59 stock is unclear at the moment, but several possibilities have been raised over the years:
The use of MP 73 stock from Line 6.
The use of MP 89CC stock from Line 4.
Eventual use of the proposed MP 14 stock, with possible automated option.
Removal of rubber-tyred guideways and use of steel-wheel rolling stock, as there is no direct connection between Line 11 and the other rubber-tyred lines.
In order to ensure better commuter service to the Northeastern inner suburbs, a six-station, 5 km extension eastbound from Mairie des Lilas to Rosny-sous-Bois is under consideration.
The scheme has been proposed by local authorities, and adopted during the 2007 review of the Ile-de-France Transportation Plan.
The line should be extended to Rosny – Bois-Perrier by 2021. In 2015 preliminary work started on the extension.
It will provide new connections with the RER E and the extended tramway line 1, which will be linked more easily to the downtown and the commuter hub of Châtelet les Halles.
On March 6, 2013, a revised plan for the proposed Grand Paris Express subway system was unveiled. The revisions call for a second extension of Line 11 to be built towards Noisy-Champs by 2030, although it is unclear if this goal will be attainable. Should the second extension commence, it is slated to eventually bring forth a full automation of Line 11. Automation is currently not planned for the Rosny extension, though the RATP and STIF had considered the possibility of automating the line later on.
Metro line 11 passes near several places of interest :
The Hôtel de Ville (City Hall) of Paris.
The Centre Georges Pompidou accommodating the Paris Museum of Modern Art.
The Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers (engineering school).
The popular quarter of Belleville, hosting one of Paris' "Chinatowns" and centres of other Asian cultures.
List of stations of the Paris Métro
List of stations of the Paris RER
