Changping District (simplified Chinese: 昌平区; traditional Chinese: 昌平區; pinyin: Chāngpíng Qū), formerly Changping County (昌平县), is situated in the suburbs of northwest Beijing.
Changping District, covering an area of 1,430 square kilometres (550 sq mi), contains two subdistricts of the city of Changping and 15 towns (five of which are suburbs of Beijing) with total population of 614,821 (2000 census). About 34 km (21 mi) from the city center, Changping is renowned for its numerous scenic spots and tourist facilities, like Datangshan museum. It is rich in natural resources, mineral products, and rural products.
The urban area of Changping (116,961 in subdistricts) has an area of 16 km2 (6.2 sq mi) and an estimated population of 130,000. Other major urban areas are Nankou (70,000) and Yangfang (40,000).
Changping District is now connected to the Beijing Subway System via the Changping Line  The line terminus is at Changping Xishankou, and the Changping Line connects to Line 8 at Zhuxinzhuang station and Line 13 at Xi'erqi Station.
There are five subdistricts and 15 towns with 5 towns of which carry the "area" (地区) label in the district:
Ming Dynasty Tombs
Cloud Platform at Juyong Pass, one of the "three great mountain passes" of the Great Wall of China
Triathlon Venue for the Triathlon at the 2008 Summer Olympics
Qincheng Prison of the Ministry of Public Security (near Xiaotangshan)
Wonderland Amusement Park (Beijing)
Changping is currently served by four metro lines operated by Beijing Subway and one commuter line operated by BCR:
      Line 5 - Tiantongyuan North, Tiantongyuan, Tiantongyuan South
      Line 8 - Zhuxinzhuang  Changping , Yuzhilu, Pingxifu, Huilongguan Dongdajie, Huoying  13 
      Line 13 - Longze, Huilongguan, Huoying
      Changping Line - Life Science Park, Zhuxinzhuang  8 , Gonghuacheng, Shahe, Shahe University Park, Nanshao, Beishaowa, Changping Dongguan, Changping, Ming Tombs, Changping Xishankou
      BCR Line S2 - Changping Railway, Nankou
The China University of Petroleum (Beijing) is in the district.
Public schools:
Changping District No. 1 High School (北京市昌平区第一中学)
Changping District No. 2 High School (北京市昌平区第二中学)
Private schools:
Beijing Huijia Private School is in Changping District.
The Korean International School in Beijing was previously located in Changping District.
Changping Railway Station
Index: Districts of Beijing
List of administrative divisions of Beijing
