Fusagasugá (Spanish pronunciation: [fusaɣasuˈɣa]) or Fusa is a town and municipality in the department of Cundinamarca, in central Colombia. It is located some forty miles from the capital, Bogotá. With 134,523 inhabitants, Fusagasugá is the second largest municipality in the department. It was founded in 1592 by Spanish priests.
It borders Pasca, Arbeláez, Tibacuy, Silvania and other municipalities of Sumapaz. Its elevation is 5,669 feet (1,728 m) above sea level, and the average temperature 68 °F (20 °C.)
The interpretation of the name in Spanish varies from "Mujer que se hace invisible" (Woman who becomes invisible) to "Mujer que se esconde tras la montaña" (Woman who hides herself behind the mountain). However, many people shorten its name to "Fusa".
The Sutagao people inhabited the region until the new town was founded by Oídor Bernardino Albornoz between 5–13 February 1592. Not much is known about the previous indigenous residents. During the visit of Oídor Ibarra, there were 759 indigenous people residing in Fusagasugá. When Oídor Aróstequi arrived in February 1760, the indigenous population had dwindled to 85, and there were 644 new settlers divided among 109 families. On February 19, 1760, a small hospital was established near the church and Father Vicente de Fresneda was given charge of it.
During a visit, two officials, Moreno and Escandón, considering the decline in the indigenous population and the corresponding growth in the local settler population, issued a decree on January 8, 1776 that the native villages in the Fusagasugá area, Pandi and Tibacuy, no longer existed, and consolidated them into the present-day city of Pasca. In the wake of this decision, all streets and plazas in the cities were renamed.
In 1771, on the direction of the mayor of Fusagasugá, the viceroy Messia de la Zerda ordered the construction of a new avenue, Santafé, which would go from Fusagasugá, passing through the nearby town of Sibaté. On August 8, 1774, Father Francisco Escobar announced that Fusagasugá was on the road that passed over the mountains and led to the neighboring towns of Apicalá and Melgar; such that travelers could not reach Bermajal, located on the same mountain as Fusagasugá, without passing through Fusagasugá. This established the suburb's local importance.
In a directive issued August 7, 1846, the president of the Colombian republic nationally recognized the road from Fusagasugá to the southern provinces, which prompted the construction of a road over the Sumapaz river in Boquerón. In 1852, Fusagasugá became part of the province of Tequendama.
On February 9, 1877, a battle took place in the hacienda El Novillero between government forces led by General Mogollón and the rebels led by Colonel Juan Ardila and Lucas Moreno. The first hospital was constructed in 1893 by the Congregation of the Sacred Heart of Jesus with money donated by Don Manuel María Aya Caicedo and Lady Sagrado Cleofé Diaz, who also founded an adjoining nursing home. Following a directive issued on December 20, 1895, Fusagasugá was made capital of Sumapaz Province, which was created by National Directive 489 on November 7, 1895 and made into Law 162 in 1896.
On February 22, 1893, Dr José Manuel Goenaga, minister of works of President Miguel Antonio Caro, contracted the construction of a highway between Sibaté, Fusagasugá, and Boquerón. The project's engineer was Enrique Pabón Liévano, a native of Fusagasugá. The project was commenced in 1905 under the administration of President Rafael Reyes but suspended on February 10, 1906 because of an attack by the Barro Colorado. It resumed in March 1913. The highway reached Fusagasugá in 1930 and Arbeláez in 1934.
In 1907, an iron and wood bridge was finished over the river Sumapaz in Boquerón which was given the name "Puente Eliseo Medina" to honor the administration of the time. In 1930, the bridge was used by automobiles for the first time, and was replaced by the current bridge in 1953.
By article 12 of ordnance 21 in 1944, the construction of a highway between Fusagasugá and Boquerón by the river Llano commenced.
The first cemetery, which was on the site of "Pekin" opened in 1822. It was replaced by a second one in 1852 which was located in front of the hospital. A third cemetery was opened by the Cura Sabogal on October 31, 1910.
In 1929, in the Quinta Coburgo, the candidacy of Enrique Olaya Herrera was announced. In 1970, the Institute Técnico Universitario (Technical Institute University) was opened. It had been created by ordenance 45 issued on December 19, 1969 and established there by directive 537 on May 8, 1970 by Governor Joaquín Piñeros Corpas.
The city's main church has been rebuilt numerous times, and for a variety of reasons. The first church was built in June 1658 by Father Andrés Méndez de Valdivieso. The second church was built by Father Poveda in 1707, and lasted until 1865. The third church was built soon after by Father Antonio Martínez. It was made of bricks, but collapsed on September 19, 1908. The fourth church was begun in its place on June 6, 1909, and was consecrated August 15, 1926, soon after its completion. It was consecrated by the local Archbishop, Ismael Perdomo. However, there were other churches throughout the city's existence, including the Nuestra Señora de Belén (English: Our Lady of Bethlehem), consecrated on August 16, 1786.
The City Council consists of 17 members. The actual Mayor is Luis Cifuentes. Fusagasugá has tended to be a stronghold of the Liberal Party, which has controlled the city's mayoralty since 1986.
Fusagasugá is administratively divided into 6 communes and 5 townships (countryside or rural division), which are further subdivided in wards (barrios) and municipal rural settlement (rural district or vereda).
The urban zone has 26 wards (barrios) which have not yet been delimited. In these wards have been developed 226 urbanistic proyects.
Centro: Santander, Emilio Sierra, Centro, Olaya, Luxemburgo, Potosí.
Norte: Barrio El Progreso, Barrio José Antonio Galán, Barrio La Cabaña, Barrio La Florida, Barrio Los Andes, Conjunto Cerrado Quinta De Los Rosales, Conjunto Cerrado San Carlos, Conjunto Los Claveles, Urbanización Andalucía (Gaitán III), Urbanización Buenavista, Urbanización Carlos Lleras, Urbanización Ciudadela Campestre Villa Natalia, Urbanización Ciudadela Campestre Villa Natalia II, Urbanización El Carmen, Urbanización El Edén, Urbanización El Lucero, Urbanización El Porvenir Asbembapor (Norte), Urbanización El Rosal, Urbanización Gaitán, Urbanización Gaitán II Etapa, Urbanización La Esmeralda I Etapa, Urbanización La Esmeralda II Etapa, Urbanización La Esperanza, Urbanización La Independencia, Urbanización La Nueva Esperanza, Urbanización La Victoria, Urbanización Las Margaritas, Urbanización Los Fundadores, Urbanización Los Guaduales, Urbanización Mi Tesoro, Urbanización Monteverde, Urbanización Nueva Jerusalén, Urbanización San Antonio, Urbanización Santa Librada, Urbanización Simón Bolívar, Urbanización Villa Armerita, Urbanización Villa De San Diego (II Norte), Urbanización Villa Luz, Urbanización Villa Rosalía.
Oriental: Barrio Antonio Nariño, Barrio Cedritos, Barrio Coburgo, Barrio Pekín, Condominio Parque La Colina, Conjunto Altos De Cedritos, Conjunto Cerrado El Bosque, Conjunto Cerrado El Mirador de Pekín, Conjunto Cerrado Paraíso de Pekín, Conjunto Cerrado Rincón de Pekín, Conjunto Cerrado Socaire, Conjunto María Isabel, Conjunto Residencial El Remanso, Conjunto Residencial Recreo De Los Sauces, Conjunto Residencial Villa Mayorga, Sector Bellavista, Sector La Palma, Sector Sauces, Urbanización Altos De Pekín, Urbanización Bella Vista, Urbanización Bosque Bonnet, Urbanización Casona De Pekín, Urbanización Colinas De Baravia, Urbanización El Mirador De Bonnet, Urbanización El Naranjal, Urbanización El Tejar Plan De Vivienda Municipal, Urbanización La Alejandra, Urbanización Los Robles, Urbanización Paraíso De Los Sauces, Urbanización Pekín (Instituto Crédito Territorial), Urbanización Santa María De Los Ángeles, Urbanización Villa Aranzazu, Urbanización Villa de los Sutagaos.
Occidental: Barrio Antiguo Balmoral, barrio Manila, barrio Piedra Grande, barrio San Mateo, Conjunto San José Piedra Grande, condominio Casa De Campo (Los Ocobos) I Etapa, condominio Santa Ana Reservado, conjunto Altos De Marsella Novelda I Etapa, conjunto Balcones De Marsella, conjunto Cerrado Acapulco, conjunto Cerrado Bosques De La Cañada, conjunto Cerrado Comarca Española, conjunto Cerrado El Caribe, conjunto Cerrado El Nidito, conjunto Cerrado El Nogal, conjunto Cerrado El Recreo De Los Alpes, conjunto Cerrado La Cañada, conjunto Cerrado La Fontana, conjunto Cerrado Rincón de Capri, conjunto Cerrado Santorini, conjunto Cerrado Villa Lorena, conjunto Cerrado Villa Nice, conjunto Cerrado Villas Del Mediterráneo, conjunto El Portal, conjunto Multifamiliar Palacio De Piedra Grande, conjunto Parque Residencial Getsemaní, conjunto Quintas De Santa María, conjunto Residencial Altos De Manila, conjunto Residencial Aranjuez, conjunto Residencial El Comboy, conjunto Residencial El Manantial, conjunto Residencial Palmas de Hupanel, conjunto Residencial Quintas de Manila, conjunto Residencial Santa Helena, conjunto Residencial Teresita I Y II, conjunto Residencial Teresita III, conjunto Residencial Terranova, conjunto Residencial Terrazas Del Manila, conjunto Residencial Villa Milena, conjunto Residencial Villas De Manila, conjunto San Nicolás, conjunto Santa Ana Campestre I Y II Etapa, conjunto Santa Ana Campestre III Y IV Etapa, conjunto Siboney 2000, conjunto Terrazas De Manila II Etapa, conjunto Villa Andrea, Manzana B Lotes 1 Y 2 Palmas De Hupanel, Multifamiliar Balcones De Balmoral, Multifamiliar El Caribe, San Nicolás Reservado, Sector El Caney, Sector El Caribe, Sector Sabaneta, Sector Triangulo De Desarrollo, Unidad De Actuación Urbanística No. 4, Urbanización Bonanza, Urbanización Ciudad Jardín II (Piedra Grande), Urbanización Ciudadela Cootransfusa, Urbanización Ciudalcampo, Urbanización El Encanto, Urbanización El Portal De San José, Urbanización Espartillal, Urbanización Fontanar, Urbanización La Abadía De San Jorge, Urbanización La María, Urbanización La Marsella, Urbanización La Villa de Sion, Urbanización Mandalay, Urbanización Nuevo Balmoral I Sector, Urbanización Nuevo Balmoral II Sector, Urbanización Palermo, Urbanización Porvenir (Manila), Urbanización Quinta Balmoral, Urbanización Rinconcito De Manila, Urbanización San Jorge, Urbanización San Nicolás, Urbanización Santa Anita, Urbanización Santa Cecilia, Urbanización Santa Clara, Urbanización Villa Adriana, Urbanización Villa Alix, Urbanización Villa Clara, Urbanización Villa Country, Urbanización Villa Lenny, Urbanización Villa María.
Suroriental: Barrio Balmoral, Barrio Fusacatán, Barrio Jaime Pardo Leal, Barrio Los Comuneros, Barrio Obrero, Barrio Pedro Pablo Bello, Conjunto Cerrado Paraíso De Balmoral, Conjunto Cerrado Santa Catalina, Conjunto Cerrado Zaira Alejandra, Conjunto Residencial La Arboleda, Conjunto Residencial Santo Domingo, Multifamiliar Altos De Fusa, Sector Mosqueral, Urbanización Aires del Quininí (Asociación De Vivienda Popular ADEVIP), Urbanización Akrópolis, Urbanización Bosques Del Oriente Etapas I Y II, Urbanización Camino Real I, Urbanización Camino Real II Y III, Urbanización El Mirador, Urbanización Florida Blanca, Urbanización Fusacatán III, Urbanización La Glorieta, Urbanización La Macarena, Urbanización Las Américas, Urbanización Las Delicias, Urbanización Managua, Urbanización Prados De Altagracia Plan De Vivienda Municipal, Urbanización Prados de Bethel, Urbanización San Fernando, Urbanización San Fernando II Etapa, Urbanización Santa Bárbara, Urbanización Santa Rosa, Urbanización Santo Domingo, Urbanización Toluca, Urbanización Villa Lady.
Suroccidental: Barrio La Venta (La Pampa), Condominio Campestre La Pradera, Conjunto Campestre Belmira, Conjunto Cerrado Alhambra (La Venta), Conjunto Cerrado Balcones De San José, Conjunto Cerrado Brisas De Miramonte, Conjunto Cerrado La Alameda, Conjunto Cerrado Las Heliconias, Conjunto Cerrado Llano Largo, Conjunto Cerrado Llano Verde, Conjunto Cerrado Pampa Campestre, Conjunto Cerrado Poblado Real, Conjunto Cerrado Villa Celeste II Etapa, Conjunto Cerrado Villa Celeste Reservado, Conjunto Cerrado Villas De La Pampa, Conjunto El Portal De Llano Largo, Conjunto Llano Alto, Conjunto Recreacional Y Habitacional Las Palmas, Conjunto Residencial Andaluz, Conjunto Residencial Asoveinte, Conjunto Residencial Caracolí, Conjunto Residencial Fénix, Conjunto Residencial Maguare, Conjunto Residencial Y Comercial San Martin De Los Olivos, Sector Cucharal Urbano, Urbanización Altamira, Urbanización Cádiz, Urbanización Caminos De Llano Largo (Loteo San Francisco), Urbanización Ciudad Eben Ezer Plan De Vivienda Municipal, Urbanización Ciudad Jardín (La Venta), Urbanización Ciudadela Comfenalco, Urbanización Conjunto Residencial 15 De Mayo, Urbanización El Futuro, Urbanización El Oasis, Urbanización El Recreo (Nuevo Milenio), Urbanización La Gran Colombia, Urbanización La Nueva Campiña, Urbanización La Primavera, Urbanización Las Brisas (Asociación De Vivienda Comunitaria), Urbanización Leidy Di (Asociación De Vivienda Comunitaria), Urbanización Llano Alto, Urbanización Llano Largo, Urbanización Llano Verde, Urbanización Los Cámbulos, Urbanización Los Girasoles, Urbanización Parques De Occidente, Urbanización Paseo Real, Urbanización Pedregal De San Ángel, Urbanización San Diego (La Venta), Urbanización San Marcos, Urbanización Villa Celeste, Urbanización Villa De La Esperanza (Vivienda de Interés Social), Urbanización Villa Patricia, Urbanización Villa Rosita.
The rural zone has divided on 6 districts, and 38 subdistricts. (190.98 square kilometers).
Nororiental: Los Robles, San Rafael, La Aguadita, Bermajal, Tierra Negra, Parte Piamonte, Parte Usatama. (34.79 square kilometers)
Oriental: El Jordán, La Palma, Pekín, Sauces, Bethel, Mosqueral, La Venta. (17.94 square kilometers)
Suroriental: El Placer, Espinalito, Sardinas, La Isla, Mesitas, Palacios, Bochica, Guayabal, Batán, Guavio, Santa Lucía, El Carmen. (59.91 square kilometers)
Suroccidental: San Antonio, Santa María, La Puerta, El Triunfo. (48.76 square kilometers)
Occidental: Parte De Usatama, Parte Piamonte, Bosachoque, El Resguardo, Cucharal, La Venta, Novillero, Viena. (29.59 square kilometers)
On 2007 the municipality ranked the tenth place on department according to its economy. The GDP estimated at 2007 is $544,984 millions. The majority of the regional economy is made up of agriculture and construction services. Aside from these sectors, there has been rapid growth in the service industry because of the strengthening in the sectors of education, health, recreation, and tourism. Local government policies to support agrotechnology have fostered short-term, local development. The municipality has nowadays the third category. Its population is growing to annual rate of 2.4%, this indicator is higher than the departamental average of 1.9%.
Due to its warm climate, Fusagasugá attracts many tourists with many hotels, resorts, pool parks, and cabins. The Pan-American highway goes through Fusagasugá's territory. In order to travel to other Colombian cities in the south-west, such as Ibagué, Neiva, or Cali, it is necessary to pass through Fusagasugá when traveling from the north.
From the highway, you can see greenhouses, plant and flower stores, handcrafted rustic furniture stores, and local restaurants.
Fusagasugá was once home to the soccer team Expreso Rojo, which plays in the Colombian second division. Cycling is a renowned sport in the Fusagasugá. Remarkable growth in roller-skating has happened within the past few decades, mainly among children.
Julio César Cadena, former professional cyclist
Víctor Hugo González, former professional cyclist
Pablo Wilches, former professional cyclist
Sutagao
