Pine City is a city in Pine County, Minnesota, United States. The population was 3,127 at the 2010 census. Pine City is the county seat of, and the largest city in, Pine County. The Initiative Foundation named Pine City "Outstanding Community" of 2009 and the NAMM Foundation identified it as one of the "Best Communities for Music Education in America" for 2010, 2011 and 2012.
Its name is a loose translation of "Chengwatana" (White-Pine Town), originally an Ojibwe village located just east of Pine City, along the Snake River. The Ojibwe name for the city is Ne-zhingwaakokaag (on a land-point full of white pines). A portion of the Mille Lacs Indian Reservation is located within Pine City.
The Dakota Indians were the first in the area. With the Ojibwa expansion, the area became a mixture of the two. By the early 19th century, the area became predominantly Ojibwa. They trapped and hunted on the land and traded furs at the nearby trading posts. With the Treaty of St. Peters of 1837, dubbed the "White Pine Treaty", lumbering began in the area. Lumbering, though, was limited by access to the available waterways.
In the late 19th century, European settlers came to the Pine City area, which was still heavily forested with thick stands of white pine, some of the largest in the state. When the railroad arrived in Pine City so began a logging expansion. Pine City prospered and grew into a city that had everything needed to serve residents, farmers, and the fast expanding lumber industry. Pine City was platted in 1869. The city was incorporated in 1881.
When Buchanan County was merged with Pine County in 1861, the county seat was consolidated to Pine City because it was already well-established. Because of its location on the far southern edge of Pine County, there have been attempts over the years to move the county seat to more centrally located Hinckley and Sandstone. However, being the most populous city in the county, Pine City always prevailed as the county seat.
In 2005, the city became the first in rural Minnesota with an annual gay pride event, East-Central Minnesota Pride, and one of only two rural communities to hold such an event in the United States. A book capturing Pine City's history in vintage photos was written as part of the Images of America series and became available in 2010.
Christmas trees for the Minnesota Governor's Residence have often come from the Pine City area.
Pine City is reached as a day trip for tourists from the Twin Cities who enjoy the downtown's specialty stores and restaurants as well as a nearby casino and recreational opportunities, including the scenic St. Croix River valley. Also, a local historical site situated along the Snake River, the North West Company Post, has become a tourist draw; it was used by French fur traders nearly two centuries ago.
Pine City is also home to two golf courses, the Pine City Country Club, a nine-hole, par 36 public course that opened in 1971, and Pokegema Lake Golf Course, a course located just west of town.
The Pine County Fair takes place in Pine City each year in late July/early August. A highlight of the fair is a two-night demolition derby that is one of Minnesota's largest, drawing several thousand spectators each evening. The five-day event is a free gate fair and also features free on-site parking.
Pine City is located in Minnesota's 8th congressional district, represented for many years by Jim Oberstar, a Democrat and now represented by Democrat Rick Nolan. Pine City is in State Legislative District 11-B, represented by State Senator Tony Lourey (DFL) and Rep. Jason Rarick.
A new courthouse and county offices were relocated from downtown to the north end of town in 2007. The former courthouse was renamed Pine Government Center in 2010 and now houses city government and other community organizations including the Chamber of Commerce.
City government: The city of Pine City is led by a mayor-council form of government. Mayoral elections occur every two years. City council seats are contested every four years. However, not all of the council members are elected in the same year, as the council elections are staggered throughout odd-numbered years. The council consists of five members elected to represent the city as a whole (that is, at-large).
The longest-serving mayor in Pine City's history was Jane Robbins.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 3.91 square miles (10.13 km2), of which 3.44 square miles (8.91 km2) is land and 0.47 square miles (1.22 km2) is water.
The city has 12 city parks, which include two undeveloped parks (Cross Lake Preserve Park, Fawn Meadows Park); two passive parks, manicured but lacking recreational equipment (Meadow Ridge Park, Thomas Park); and eight active parks, with playgrounds and/or sports facilities, including:
Below is a table of average high and low temperatures throughout the year in Pine City.
Pine City is served by the Rush City Regional Airport, seven miles south.
Presently, the Rush Line Corridor task force is studying the feasibility of rail service to serve area commuters and the Northern Lights Express passenger line is proposed to serve area residents. For travel within the city, there is local taxi service available.
Pine City is served by the Arrowhead Transit intra-county system. An intercity bus service called Jefferson Lines runs from Pine City to St. Paul or Duluth twice daily.
Pine City is located along Interstate 35 between the Twin Cities and Duluth. The St. Croix Scenic Byway also passes through Pine City. The major highways include:
Pine City is located on rail lines owned by BNSF Railway and leased by St. Croix Valley Railroad.
There is a planned, non-motorized trail dubbed the Twin Cities-to-Twin Ports Trail that has been awarded federal and state funding to begin to connect the Sunrise Prairie Trail, near North Branch with the Willard Munger State Trail, near Hinckley.
MINPACK, Inc. is one of the largest employers, with over 100 employees. Atscott Manufacturing Company, has 85 employees. Both have their headquarters in Pine City. Other large employers in the community include Wal Mart, Innovative Basement Systems, Product Fabricators, Inc., Broekema Beltway, ISD 578, Therapeutic Services Agency, Pine County, Lakeside Medical Center, and Lake Superior Laundry.
Pine City serves as a shopping hub for such surrounding Minnesota communities as Askov, Braham, Brook Park, Henriette, Hinckley, Finlayson, Rock Creek, Rush City and Sandstone, as well as Grantsburg, Wisconsin, and each of their respective townships. Serving as a subregional center, Pine City accommodates a much larger population by day as residents from the smaller, aforementioned, surrounding communities both shop and work there.
In addition to a Walmart Supercenter, Pine City is home to three retail shopping centers: Pine Plaza, Evergreen Square and Northridge Center. Pine Plaza, located in the central business district, was Pine City's first shopping center. It is anchored by an old-fashioned drive-in A&W All-American Food Restaurant, one of the few remaining carhops in the state. Evergreen Square is anchored by Dollar Tree and is also home to such stores as Radio Shack, Great Clips, and Subway (restaurant), as well as a Fairview Health Services clinic. Pine City's newest shopping center is Northridge Center, located at the city's developing northern freeway interchange, home to a Verizon store, a pharmacy and several service-related enterprises.
From early spring to late fall, a large flea market takes place every Wednesday morning at the Pine County Fairgrounds. Vendors feature everything from antique tools and furniture to fresh flowers and produce. A locally-grown farmers market is held seasonally each Friday and Saturday as well.
Pine City has one of the most evident downtowns between the Twin Cities and the Twin Ports. Robinson Park is in the heart of it and forms the center of the town square, with the old train depot to the east, a library to the south and many mom and pop shops lining 5th Street on the west side of the park.
As of the census of 2000, there were 3,043 residents, 1,222 households, and 734 families in the city. The population density was 1,076.3 people per square mile (415.2/km²). There were 1,275 housing units at an average density of 451.0 per square mile (174.0/km²).
95.58% White, 1.54% Native American, 1.22% Hispanic or Latino of any race, 0.74% Asian, 0.26% African American, 0.19% from other races, 0.03% Pacific Islander and 1.67% from two or more races.
After the Census 2010 count of same-sex partners in Minnesota, it was discovered that the Greater Pine City area was home to some of the most concentrated same-sex coupled households of any rural area of the state.
The city has continued to grow since it was incorporated. Much of the growth of the area occurs around the lakes in the neighboring townships, in Pokegama, Chengwatana or Pine City Township, and as of the latest census, the Pine City Zip Code (55063) had 9,348 residents.
There were 1,222 households out of which 30.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.8% were married couples living together, 12.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 39.9% were non-families. 34.7% of all households were made up of individuals and 19.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.38 and the average family size was 3.04.
In the city the population was spread out with 25.3% under the age of 18, 10.5% from 18 to 24, 25.0% from 25 to 44, 17.9% from 45 to 64, and 21.3% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 37 years. For every 100 females there were 88.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 84.0 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $29,000 and the median income for a family was $37,000. Males had a median income of $30,000 versus $20,000 for females. The per capita income for the city was $16,000. About 10.8% of families and 15.0% of the population were below the poverty line, including 24.4% of those under age 18 and 14.1% of those age 65 or over.
Ancestry of Pine City residents is primarily German (36%), Norwegian (17%), Swedish (15%), and Czech (8%).
Pine City is home to several churches, of various denominations, including:
The Pine City Public Schools (Independent School District #578) serve more than 1,600 area students through one PK–6 elementary school (Pine City Elementary), a 7–12 Junior/Senior High School, which was named a U.S. News & World Report "Best High School", and the Pine City Area Learning Center. Pine City is also home to St. Mary's School (Catholic), which serves preschool and K–6 students.
Pine Technical and Community College is a two-year institution offering a wide variety of technical and general education courses. It is also part of the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities system. Pine Tech's gunsmithing curriculum is one of the only programs of its kind in the country and draws students from throughout North America.
The Pine City Public Library is part of the East Central Regional Library. The ECRL holds nearly 400,000 volumes and serves over 65,000 cardholders in the region. Pine City is also home to the George E. Sausen Memorial Law Library, located inside the Pine County Courthouse.
ECFE/Community Education (early childhood), 700 6th Avenue SW
Pine City Elementary School: grades K-6, 700 6th Avenue SW
St. Mary's School: grades K-6, 815 6th Avenue SW
Pine City Junior High School: grades 7-9, 1400 Main Street S
Pine City Senior High School: grades 10-12, 1400 Main Street S
Pine City Area Learning Center (ALC): grades 9 - 12, 1225 Main Street S
Vision School, Pine Plaza, 870 Main Street S
Pine City's Lakeside Medical Center has a full-service clinic and nursing home facility. FirstLight Health System – Pine City Clinic provides a variety of family medicine, obstetrics, orthopedic, physical therapy, occupational therapy and speech-language pathology services. FirstLight Health System opened a new family practice clinic in January 2011. The $3 million facility encompasses 13,500 square feet (1,250 m2), and an addition opened in 2015, a freestanding emergency facility. Pine City is also home to three chiropractic clinics and More Than Sprouts, a local market featuring organic and health foods.
Utility providers are regulated monopolies. East Central Energy provides electrical utilities to the community and is a co-op member of Great River Energy. Minnesota Energy supplies gas and US Cable provides cable television. The city treats and distributes water and several local businesses provide garbage removal and recycling services.
The Pine City Pirates is the city's baseball team, featuring mostly local players and competing in the Eastern Minny North League, which is part of the Minnesota Baseball Association. Though presently not fielding a team, amateur baseball has been a part of Pine City culture for years and has enjoyed many successes in the past. The Pirates have had several state appearances including: 1950, 1952 B 2nd, 1953 B 3rd, 1961 and 1962.
Pine City's growing arts community placed it on 2010, 2011 and 2012 lists of "Best Communities for Music Education in America." The high school band and musical theatre program built its reputation under the former direction of Mr. Bradley Mariska, and musical ensembles at Pine City High School give free performances throughout the school year. A major recent development is the Pine Center for the Arts, which opened in downtown Pine City in 2009. The center is a regional arts facility that houses a variety of educational and performance-based programs relating to theatre, music, visual art, literature, and dance. Classes and special events take place throughout the year. Pine City has an active community theater, the Heritage Players, which performs semiannually. The Pine City Arts Council sponsors a variety of annual events, most notably a free Friday night summer concert series held in Robinson Park. An annual concert series is also hosted in an 800-seat auditorium at Pine City Junior/Senior High School. This new performance space opened in 2014.
The following community and regional events are held in and around Pine City.
The major weekly newspaper in the area is the Pine City Pioneer, with a circulation of over 3,000. The Pioneer is owned by Kanabec Publishing and edited by Mike Gainor. Papers from the Twin Cities are also commonly read.
Pine City receives TV signals from the Twin Cities. Channels include Twin Cities Public Television, WCCO 4, KSTP-TV, KMSP-TV, KARE, WFTC, and KSTC-TV.
WCMP (AM) and WCMP-FM are the two local Pine City stations. The rest are "fringe" stations from surrounding areas. Pine City also receives radio stations from the Twin Cities, St. Cloud, and western Wisconsin areas.
In the motion picture Drop Dead Gorgeous (1999), starring Kirsten Dunst, there was a fictitious "Miss Pine City" character, portrayed by an actual Pine Citian, Amy Olson.
Craig Wright, best known as the writer of HBO's Six Feet Under, set a series of plays in fictitious "Pine City, Minnesota." These have been performed across the United States: The Pavilion, Orange Flower Water, Molly's Delicious, Melissa Arctic and Grace, which takes place in Florida, but is about people who come from "Pine City."
Author Dean Hovey wrote three fictional mystery novels that are set in Pine City: Where Evil Hides, Hooker and Unforgettable: A Pine County Mystery.
Author Richie Ryan wrote "What We Are: Richie's Story" and "What We Are II: Summer Heat", adult fiction, both set in Pine City.
In the film Tommy Boy, a deer is hit near Pine City on Tommy Boy's sales trip.
The Larry Millett book "Sherlock Holmes and the Red Demon" is set against the backdrop of the devastating Hinckley Fire and in the Pine City area.
Missing child Aaron Mitchell Anderson, of rural Pine City, appeared in the music video for Runaway Train (Soul Asylum song). After his picture was shown, his full name appeared in large capital letters on the screen along with the words "missing since April 7, 1989".
During a battle with a rare form of Leukemia, Pine City resident and U.S. Air Force Cadet Brian Bauman appeared in the March 4, 1996 issue of People (magazine) after receiving a bone marrow match from his Korean homeland.
In 2011, a Guinness World Record was set at the Frisbee golf course in Voyageur Park for most holes of disc golf played in a 24-hour period. Dan Schnabel beat the previous record set by over 100 holes and finished with 1,305 holes played including three aces during that time period.
Jack Schultz, founder of a Midwestern economic development firm and author of the book “Boomtown USA” (Published February 1, 2004), said 12 small cities in Minnesota (including Pine City) that he coined "agurbs" were among a group of 397 nationwide to outperform major metropolitan areas and were poised to boom.
