Manor House is a station on the Piccadilly line of the London Underground, on the boundary between Travelcard Zone 2 and Zone 3. It straddles the border between the London Boroughs of Hackney and Haringey, the postal address and three of the entrances being in the former, and one entrance in the latter.
The station, named after a nearby public house, is situated at the junction of Seven Sisters Road and Green Lanes and was designed by Charles Holden. Opened on 19 September 1932, it lies between Finsbury Park and Turnpike Lane tube stations. Like all stations on the Cockfosters extension, Manor House station set new aesthetic standards, not previously seen on London's Underground. The station was equipped with nine street level entrances, two of which gave access to tram routes to and from Tottenham, Edmonton and Stamford Hill via tramway island exits into Seven Sisters Road. The last of these tram services were withdrawn in 1938 and replaced by trolleybuses and the exits were removed in 1951. The sub-surface areas of the station were tiled in biscuit coloured tiles lined with blue friezes. These were refurbished in 2005. The station tunnels have, in common with those of Turnpike Lane and Wood Green, a diameter of 23 feet (7 metres) and were designed for the greater volume of traffic expected. In contrast, Bounds Green and Southgate have only 21 foot (6.4 metres) diameter platform tunnels. The construction of "suicide pits" between the rails was also innovative. These were built in connection with a system of passageways under the platforms to give access to the track.
Next to the northern exit are the remains of a tramway track, which leads into the rear of the former Metropolitan Electric Tramways Headquarters (M.E.T) building, later the Eastern Divisional Office of London Transport Buses.
During the planning of the Victoria line a proposal to transfer Manor House station to the Victoria line was put forward. New tunnels were also proposed for the Piccadilly line between Finsbury Park and Turnpike Lane, which would have considerably reduced the travelling time from outer North London to Central London. The inconvenience caused during re-construction, as well as the cost, ensured that the ideas were not pursued.
London Buses routes 29, 141, 253, 254, 259, 279 and 341 and night routes N29, N253 and N279 serve the station.
