Ōsaki Station (大崎駅, Ōsaki-eki) is a railway station in Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan, jointly operated by East Japan Railway Company (JR East) and Tokyo Waterfront Area Rapid Transit (TWR).
Ōsaki Station is served by the following JR East lines.
Saikyō Line
Shōnan-Shinjuku Line
Yamanote Line
It also forms the northern starting point of the TWR Rinkai Line to Shin-Kiba. Most Saikyō Line trains operate through to Shin-Kiba on the Rinkai Line.
The station has four island platforms serving eight tracks. Platforms 1 to 4 are for the Yamanote Line, and 5 to 8 are shared by the Saikyō Line, the Shōnan-Shinjuku Line, and the Rinkai Line. Ōsaki is one of the stations on the Yamanote Line loop where trains are put into and taken out of service. It therefore has four tracks (two in each direction) for the Yamanote Line so as not to interfere with continuing trains (trains go several rounds before being taken out). Chest-high platform edge doors were introduced on the Yamanote Line platforms from 22 December 2012.
There are two sets of ticket barriers: the "north" and "south" gates. The north gate provides access to the east and west exits, while the south gate provides access to the new east and new west exits.
The station has a "Midori no Madoguchi" staffed ticket office. Toilet facilities are located inside the ticket barriers, close to the north gate.
The station opened on February 25, 1901 as a station of Nippon Railway, which was nationalized in 1906. After serving the Yamanote Line for a century, on December 1, 2002 new platforms for the Saikyō Line, the Rinkai Line and the Shōnan-Shinjuku Line opened on the west side of the station.
In fiscal 2013, the JR East station was used by an average of 143,397 passengers daily (boarding passengers only), making it the eighteenth-busiest station operated by JR East. In fiscal 2013, the TWR station was used by an average of 58,041 people daily (boarding passengers only), making it the busiest station operated by TWR. The average boarding passenger figures for previous years are as shown below.
List of railway stations in Japan
