Gil Eanes (or Eannes, in the old Portuguese spelling; Portuguese pronunciation: [ʒiɫ iˈɐnɨʃ]) was a 15th-century Portuguese navigator and explorer.
Eanes was born in Lagos in 1395. Little is known about his personal life prior to his role in the Portuguese Age of Discovery, and was considered a household servant and shield-bearer of the Infante Henry the Navigator. He was a native of Lagos on which he based his sea voyages, in the southern Algarve.
He joined the service of Prince Henry's expeditions in 1433, when the Infante entrusted him with a vessel and crew, in order to attempt to round Cape Bojador, an impassable cape, with the then level of knowledge and equipment. Sailing from Lagos, Portugal, Eanes made an unknown number of voyages along the west coast of Africa, before being driven west towards the Canary Islands. In the islands he captured some inoffensive natives and returned with them as captives to Sagres, excusing his failure by recounting the dangers of the trip. His return was greeted with reserve and coldness in the court of Prince Henry, who had expected the navigator to succeed in rounding the Cape. Eanes hoped to return to favour in the following year, if the Prince would favour him with a second expedition. In 1434, his barquentine-caravel and crew was able to sail beyond Cape Bojador and return to Sagres, reporting the conditions of the water, land and ease of navigation beyond the Cape, and bringing with him some wild roses to prove that they had succeeded in their expedition. The discovery of a passable route around Cape Bojador marked the beginning of the Portuguese exploration of Africa.
Eanes made another voyage, with Afonso Gonçalves Baldaia, in 1435. They sailed about 30 leagues (144 km), or even 50 leagues (240 km) south of Cape Bojador and reached the African coast. Although they did not discover any inhabitants immediately, they did find traces of a human presence, during a voyage that was considered favourable. They named the bay in which they anchored Angra dos Ruivos (Cove of Reds), for the abundance of fish (resembling gurnets) that they caught in the waters.
List of explorations
List of explorers
Portuguese Empire
Timeline of European exploration
Morison, Samuel (1974), The European Discovery of America: The Southern Voyages, 1492–1616, New York: Oxford University Press 
Kerr, Robert (1844), A general history and collection of voyages and travels, arranged... 2, Edinburgh, Scotland: William Blackwood 
Villiers, Alan (1956), Pioneers of the Seven Seas, London, England: Routledge & Paul 
Ray Howgego. "Gil Eannes". Discoverers Web. 
Seed, Patricia (2007), "Navigating the Mid-Atlantic, or What Gil Eanes Achieved", in Cañizares-Esguerra, Jorge; Seeman, Erik R., The Atlantic in Global History, 1500–2000, London, England: Pearson