Zhangye (simplified Chinese: 张掖; traditional Chinese: 張掖; pinyin: Zhāngyè) is a prefecture-level city in northwest-central Gansu province, People's Republic of China, bordering Inner Mongolia to the north and Qinghai to the south.
Zhangye is in the center of the Hexi Corridor. The area was the frontier for much of China's history, forming a natural passage to the Central Asian portion of the empire. In fact, the name Zhangye (lit. "to extend the arm") is an abbreviation of 张国臂掖，以通西域 (lit. To extend the arm of the country, through to the Western Realm). During the Western Han dynasty, Chinese armies were often engaged against the Xiongnu in this area. It was also an important section of the Silk Road. The Mongol Emperor Kublai Khan is said to have been born in the Dafo Temple, which is also the site of the longest reclining wooden Buddha in China.
The city was formerly known as Ganzhou (甘州), a name retained both in the municipal region seat Ganzhou District and the Gan of the province of Gansu. In The Travels of Marco Polo, Marco Polo describes spending a year in a city called Campichu, which has been identified with Ganzhou (Zhangye).
Zhangye is located in far western Gansu province. In the north it borders Inner Mongolia and in the south Qinghai. It has a large area of 42,000 km2 (16,000 sq mi) and is blessed with numerous streams, abundant sunlight and fertile soil, making it an important agricultural centre for Gansu and all of China.
The Zhangye Danxia National Geological Park, covering an area of 510 square kilometres (200 sq mi), is located in Linze and Sunan counties of Zhangye, 30 kilometres (19 mi) west of the city center. Known for its colorful rock formations, it has been voted by Chinese media outlets as one of the most beautiful landforms in China.
Zhangye has a cold desert climate (Köppen BWk) with very warm summers and cold and very dry winters. The monthly 24-hour average temperature ranges from −9.2 °C (15.4 °F) in January to 21.5 °C (70.7 °F) in July. The mean annual temperature is 7.31 °C (45.2 °F), while annual rainfall is 130 millimetres (5.1 in), almost all of which falls from May to September. The winters are so dry that snow is extremely rare.
Zhangye has 1 urban district, 4 counties, 1 autonomous county, 97 towns, and 978 villages.
Zhangye has a total population of 1,199,515, only 260,000 being urban residents. There are 26 ethnic minorities other than Han represented including many Hui, Yugur and Tibetans.
Zhangye is served by China National Highways numbers G30 Expressway, 227 and 312.
Zhangye Railway Station is on the Lanzhou–Xinjiang Railway, located to the north east of the city. A high speed railway station has been constructed on the south west side of the city, Zhangye West Railway Station was opened on the 26th of December, 2014 as part of the Lanzhou–Ürümqi High-Speed Railway.
Zhangye Ganzhou Airport, a combined civilian-military airport, opened in October 2011 with flights to Lanzhou and Xi'an.
The 2002 GDP was 7.566 billion RMB, almost 9% growth over the previous year. Annual urban income was 5960 RMB,10.4% growth from the previous year and rural income was 3092 RMB, up 5%.
Hexi University (河西学院) is located in Zhangye. Approximately 10,000 students are enrolled at the university.
Zhangye has hosted a round of the Chinese Rally Championship (CRC) since 2011. Held on specially constructed roads across the deserts north and to the south of the city. The event attracts over 100 entries regularly, including international foreign drivers. A stadium for side-by-side super special stages has also been constructed.
