Philippe or Filip (French: Philippe Léopold Louis Marie, Dutch: Filip(s) Leopold Lodewijk Maria, German: Philipp Leopold Ludwig Maria, English: Philip Leopold Lewis Maria; born 15 April 1960) is the King of the Belgians, having ascended the throne on 21 July 2013. He is the eldest child of King Albert II, whom he succeeded upon Albert's abdication for health reasons, and Queen Paola. He married Countess Mathilde d'Udekem d'Acoz (now Queen Mathilde), with whom he has four children. King Philippe's elder daughter, Princess Elisabeth, is next in the line of succession. At age 56, Philippe is Europe's third-youngest reigning monarch, following the 49-year-old Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands (born 27 April 1967) and the 48-year-old Felipe VI of Spain (born 30 January 1968).
Philippe was born on 15 April 1960 during the reign of his uncle, King Baudouin of Belgium. His father, Prince Albert, Prince of Liège (later King Albert II) was the second son of King Leopold III of Belgium and a younger brother of Baudouin. His mother, Paola, Princess of Liège (later Queen Paola) was a daughter of Italian aristocrat, Fulco VIII, Prince Ruffo di Calabria, 6th Duke of Guardia Lombarda. He was born at the Belvédère Castle in Laeken north of Brussels. He was baptised one month later at the church of Saint Jacques-sur-Coudenberg in Brussels on 17 May, and named Philippe after his great-great-grandfather Prince Philippe, Count of Flanders. His godparents were his paternal grandfather, King Leopold III, and his maternal grandmother, Donna Luisa, Princess Ruffo di Calabria.
From 1978 to 1981, Philippe was educated at the Belgian Royal Military Academy in the 118th "Promotion Toutes Armes". On 26 September 1980, he was appointed second lieutenant and took the officer's oath.
He continued his education at Trinity College, Oxford and he attended graduate school at Stanford University, California, where he graduated in 1985 with an MA degree in political science.
He obtained his fighter pilot's wings and his certificates as a parachutist and a commando. In 1989, he attended a series of special sessions at the Royal Higher Defence Institute. The same year, he was promoted to Colonel. On 25 March 2001, the Prince was appointed to the rank of Major-General in the Land Component and the Air Component and to the rank of Rear-Admiral in the Naval Component.
Philippe married Mathilde d'Udekem d'Acoz, daughter of a Walloon Count of Belgian noble family and female line descendant of Polish noble families such as the Princes Sapieha and Counts Komorowski, on 4 December 1999 in Brussels, in a civil ceremony at the Brussels Town Hall and a religious ceremony at the Cathedral of Saint Michel in Brussels. They have four children:
Princess Elisabeth Thérèse Marie Hélène, Duchess of Brabant, born 25 October 2001
Prince Gabriel Baudouin Charles Marie, born 20 August 2003
Prince Emmanuel Léopold Guillaume François Marie, born 4 October 2005
Princess Eléonore Fabiola Victoria Anne Marie, born 16 April 2008
On 6 August 1993, the government named Philippe as Honorary Chairman of the Belgian Foreign Trade Board (BFTB). He succeeded his father, who had been Honorary Chairman of the BFTB since 1962. On 3 May 2003, Philippe was appointed Honorary chairman of the board of the Foreign Trade Agency, replacing the BFTB.
In this capacity, Philippe has headed more than 60 economic missions. Upon his accession as seventh King of the Belgians, this role was taken over by his sister Princess Astrid.
King Albert II announced on 3 July 2013 that he would abdicate in favour of Philippe on 21 July 2013. Approximately one hour after King Albert II's abdication, Prince Philippe was sworn in as King of the Belgians. His eldest child, Princess Elisabeth became his heir apparent and is expected to become Belgium's first queen regnant.
26 September 1980 – 21 March 1983:
 Belgian Air Force, Second lieutenant.
 Belgian Army, Second lieutenant.
January – end March 1983: Platoon leader, 15th Comp., 3rd Parachutists Battalion of the Paracommando Regt
21 March 1983 – 1 December 1989:
 Belgian Air Force, Captain.
 Belgian Army, Captain.
1 December 1989 – 5 April 2001:
 Belgian Air Force, Colonel
 Belgian Army, Colonel.
5 April 2001 – 25 March 2010:
 Belgian Air Component (Belgian Air Force before 2002), General-major
 Belgian Land Component (Belgian Army before 2002), General-major
 Belgian Marine Component (Naval Force before 2002), Divisional admiral
Since 15 March 2010: Belgian Air Component, Lieutenant-general
 Belgian Land Component, Lieutenant-general
 Belgian Marine Component, Vice admiral.
Since 21 July 2013 (Oath as King):
 Belgian Air Component, General
 Belgian Land Component, General
 Belgian Marine Component, Admiral.
15 April 1960 – 9 August 1993: His Royal Highness Prince Philippe of Belgium
9 August 1993 – 21 July 2013: His Royal Highness The Duke of Brabant
21 July 2013 – present: His Majesty The King of the Belgians
See also: List of honours of the Belgian Royal Family by country
 Belgium: Sovereign Knight Grand Cordon of the Order of Leopold
 Belgium: Sovereign Knight of the Order of the African Star
 Belgium: Sovereign Knight of the Royal Order of the Lion
 Belgium: Sovereign Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown
 Belgium: Sovereign Knight of the Order of Leopold II
 Argentina: Grand Cross of the Order of the Liberator General San Martín
 Austrian Imperial and Royal Family: Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece
 Bolivia: Grand Cross of the Order of the Condor of the Andes
 Denmark: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Elephant
 Finland: Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Rose of Finland
 Germany: Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, Special Class
 Greece: Grand Cross of the Order of Honour
 Hungary: Grand Cross with Chain of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary
  Vatican: Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre
 Sovereign Military Order of Malta: Knight Grand Cross of Justice of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta, 1st Class
 Japan: Knight Grand Cordon with Collar of the Order of the Chrysanthemum
 Jordan: Knight Grand Cordon with Collar of the Order of al-Hussein bin Ali
 Luxembourg: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau
 Netherlands: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau
 Netherlands: Recipient of the King Willem-Alexander Inauguration Medal
 Norway: Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of St. Olav
 Poland: Grand Cross Order of the White Eagle
 Poland: Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Poland
 Portugal: Grand Cross of the Order of Christ
 Portugal: Grand Cross of the Order of Aviz
 Spain: Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic
 Sweden: Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Order of the Seraphim
 Sweden: Recipient of the 70th Birthday Badge Medal of King Carl XVI Gustaf
 Turkey: Member of the Decoration of the State of Republic of Turkey, 1st Class
International Military Sports Council: Grand Cross of the International Military Sports Council Order of Merit
Line of succession to the Belgian throne
Prince Philippe Fund
