King Munjong (1414–1452) was the fifth King of the Joseon Dynasty, who ruled Korea from 1450 to 1452. He was the eldest son of King Sejong and succeeded him in 1450, but died of disease two years later. He was succeeded by his son, Danjong of Joseon.
Most of Munjong's achievements were performed during his princely life. Although credited is primarily given to Jang Yeong-sil for inventing the water gauge, the Annals of the Joseon Dynasty state that it was the Crown Prince who found measures of water levels in the ground. He improved Hwacha as well-known type for nowadays, by himself and yonger brother Pe. ImYung(Yi Gu, 임영대군 이구). Also, it was Munjong who took care of state affairs late during King Sejong's reign, as Sejong developed various illnesses and disorders.
Munjong was the longest holder of the position of Crown Prince during the Joseon Dynasty, holding the position from 1421 to 1450, a record 29 years. From 1442 until his own accession to the throne in 1450, he served as regent to King Sejong.
Father: King Sejong (세종)
Mother: Queen Soheon of the Cheongsong Shim clan (소헌왕후 심씨, September 28, 1395 – March 24, 1446)
Consorts and their Respective Issue:
Royal Noble Consort Hwi of the Andong Kim clan (휘빈 김씨, 1410–1429) - No issue.
Royal Noble Consort Sun of the Ha-eum Bong clan (순빈 봉씨, 1414–1436) - No issue.
Queen Hyeondeok of the Andong Kwon clan (현덕왕후 권씨, 1418–1441)Yi Hong-wi, the Royal Prince Successor (이홍위 왕세자), only son
An unnamed Daughter (died in childhood)
Princess Gyeonghye (경혜공주, 1436 – December 30, 1473), 2nd daughter
Royal Noble Consort Suk of the Namyang Hong clan (숙빈 홍씨)
An unnamed daughter (died in childhood)
Yang Sa-chik (사칙 양씨)
Princess Gyeongsuk (경숙옹주, 1439–?)
An unnamed daughter (died in childhood)
Moon Suk-ui of the Nampyeong Mun clan (숙의 문씨, 1426 – September 26, 1508) - No issue.
Kwon So-yong (소용 권씨)
No issue.
Jeong So-yong (소용 정씨)
An unnamed son (died in childhood)
Yoon So-hun (소훈 윤씨)
No issue.
Yoo Seung-hwi (승휘 유씨)
No issue.
Court Lady Jang (상궁 장씨)
An unnamed son (died in childhood)
King Sejong is considered as the best king in Korean history, however he didn't have good daughter-in-laws. He especially took care of Royal Noble Consort Sun of the Ha-eum Bong clan (순빈 봉씨) after experiencing a loss of the first daughter-in-law. Firstly, Royal Noble Consort Hwi of the Andong Kim clan wanted to gain love from Munjong. She burned shoes of Munjong's love and made her drink the ashes with alcohol. Later, King Sejong found out and she was kicked out of her position which was the second highest position where woman could go during Joseon Dynasty. After Royal Noble Consort Hwi of the Andong Kim clan lost her position, Royal Noble Consort Sun of the Ha-eum Bong clan (순빈 봉씨) became crowned prince's second wife. However, she was so lonely that she loved one of the made named So-ssang (소쌍). Also she relied on alcohol too much and at that time period, woman drinking too much alcohol was unacceptable. She lost her position because the king found out that she was a lesbian. Lastly, Queen of the Andong Kwon clan became the third wife of Munjong. She was the only wife that Munjong loved and she gave birth to Princess Gyeonghye and Danjong. Danjong was the next king of Joseon after Munjong died. She wasn't a troublemaker but she died right after she gave birth to her son. (http://navercast.naver.com/contents.nhn?rid=77&contents_id=57444)
King Munjong Gongsun Heummyung Insuk Gwangmun Seonghyo the Great of Korea
문종공순흠명인숙광문성효대왕
文宗恭順欽明仁肅光文聖孝大王
