The President of Kyrgyzstan is the head of state and the highest official of Kyrgyzstan. The President, according to the constitution, "is the symbol of the unity of people and state power, and is the guarantor of the Constitution of the Kyrgyz Republic, and of an individual and citizen." The President is directly elected for no more than one six-year term by the Kyrgyz electorate. The office of President was established in 1990 replacing the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet that existed, in different forms, from 1927 whilst the country was known as the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic.
The first popularly-elected office-holder was Askar Akayev, who served from October, 1990 until March 24, 2005. In July 2005, Kurmanbek Bakiyev was elected. He was re-elected in 2009, but large riots in April 2010 forced him to resign and flee the country. Roza Otunbayeva was selected in April 2010 to head the interim government. She was officially inaugurated on July 3, 2010 as President for a limited term, until elections could be organised. Her successor, Almazbek Atambayev, was elected in the Kyrgyzstani presidential election, 2011 and took over on 1 December 2011.
The office of President is open to all citizens of Kyrgyzstan, who are no younger than 35 years of age, and no older than 65 years of age. A candidate must have a command of the state language, and have resided in the Republic for no less than 15 years before the nomination of his or her candidacy for the position. The President cannot be a deputy of the Jogorku Kenesh (Parliament), occupy other positions, or carry out entrepreneurial activities, and must suspend activity in political parties and organizations for their period in office.
On taking office the President must take the following oath, stipulated by Article 45 of the constitution, within 30 days of election before the assembled members of the legislative chamber:
The President is elected by the citizens of Kyrgyzstan by a majority of votes cast. These elections are held on the basis of universal suffrage, and by secret ballot. To become a candidate a person must obtain the signatures of fifty thousand registered voters.
For an election to be considered valid the turnout must not be lower than fifty percent. Similarly, if a candidate wins the backing of fifty percent of the voters who participated they are the winner. Should no candidate win an outright majority in the first round, the two candidates with the highest number of votes face each other in a second ballot.
The head of state holds significant power as provided for in the constitution. This states that they have the authority to:
Appoint the Prime Minister of Kyrgyzstan and other members of government
Present candidates to Parliament for positions within the Supreme Court
Direct foreign policy
Present and sign law
Announce all elections and enact decrees
Be Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces
The President may be dismissed from office by Parliament only on the basis of a charge made by the Legislative Assembly of state treason or another grievous crime supported by a ruling of the Constitutional Court. Such a decision requires the support of two-thirds of the Jogorku Kenesh who are immediately dismissed should the President be found innocent.
If the President becomes unable to carry out their duties for reasons such as death, illness or impeachment, the Prime Minister shall carry out their duties until the election of a new Head of State. This must take place within three months of the termination of their Presidency.
To date, Kyrgyzstan knew no peaceful transition of power from president to president. Both Askar Akayev and Kurmanbek Bakiev were forced to leave their chairs by a civil unrest.
The first column consecutively numbers the individuals who have served as president, while the second column consecutively numbers the Presidential terms or administrations.
