A marquess (UK /ˈmɑːkwɪs/; French: marquis, [mɑʁki]) is a nobleman of hereditary rank in various European peerages and in those of some of their former colonies. The term is also used to translate equivalent Asian styles, as in imperial China and Japan.
In Great Britain and Ireland, the correct spelling of the aristocratic title of this rank is marquess (although for aristocratic titles on the European mainland, the French spelling of marquis is often used in English). In Great Britain and Ireland, the title ranks below a duke and above an earl (see "Marquesses in the United Kingdom"). A woman with the rank of a marquess, or the wife of a marquess, is called a marchioness /ˌmɑːrʃəˈnɛs/ in Great Britain and Ireland or a marquise /mɑːrˈkiːz/ elsewhere in Europe. The dignity, rank or position of the title is referred to as a marquisate or marquessate.
The theoretical distinction between a marquess and other titles has, since the Middle Ages, faded into obscurity. In times past, the distinction between a count and a marquess was that the land of a marquess, called a march, was on the border of the country, while a count's land, called a county, often was not. As a result of this, a marquess was trusted to defend and fortify against potentially hostile neighbors and was thus more important and ranked higher than a count. The title is ranked below that of a duke, which was often restricted to the royal family and those that were held in high enough esteem to be granted such a title.
In the German lands, a Margrave was a ruler of an immediate Imperial territory (examples include the Margrave of Brandenburg, the Margrave of Baden and the Margrave of Bayreuth), not simply a nobleman like a marquess or marquis in Western and Southern Europe. German rulers did not confer the title of marquis; holders of marquisates in Central Europe were largely associated with the Italian and Spanish crowns.
The word entered the English language from the Old French marchis ("ruler of a border area") in the late 13th or early 14th century. The French word was derived from marche ("frontier"), itself descended from the Middle Latin marca ("frontier"), from which the modern English words "march" and "mark" also descend. The distinction between governors of frontier territories and interior territories was made as early as the founding of the Roman Empire when some provinces were set aside for administration by the senate and more unpacified or vulnerable provinces were administered by the emperor. The titles "duke" and "count" were similarly distinguished as ranks in the late empire, with dux (literally, "leader") being used for a provincial military governor and the rank of comes (literally "companion," that is, of the Emperor) given to the leader of an active army along the frontier.
In Great Britain and Ireland, the correct spelling for an English aristocrat of this rank is marquess. The word "marquess" is unusual in English, ending in "-ess" but referring to a male and not a female. A woman with the rank of a marquess, or the wife of a marquess, is called a marchioness in Great Britain and Ireland, or a marquise /mɑːrˈkiːz/ elsewhere in Europe. The dignity, rank or position of the title is referred to as a marquisate or marquessate.
The honorific prefix "The Most Honourable" is a form of address that precedes the name of a marquess or marchioness in the United Kingdom.
The rank of marquess was a relatively late introduction to the British peerage: no marcher lords had the rank of marquess, though some were earls. On the evening of the Coronation of Queen Victoria in 1838, the Prime Minister Lord Melbourne explained to her why (from her journals):
"I spoke to Ld M. about the numbers of Peers present at the Coronation, & he said it was quite unprecedented. I observed that there were very few Viscounts, to which he replied "There are very few Viscounts," that they were an old sort of title & not really English; that they came from Vice-Comites; that Dukes & Barons were the only real English titles; — that Marquises were likewise not English, & that people were mere made Marquises, when it was not wished that they should be made Dukes".
The following list may still be incomplete. Feminine forms follow after a slash; many languages have two words, one for the "modern" marquess and one for the original margrave.
In Italy the equivalent modern rank (as opposed to margravio) is that of marchese, the wife of whom is a marchesa, a good example of how several languages adopted a new word derived from marquis for the modern style, thus distinguishing it from the old "military" margraves. Even where neither title was ever used domestically, such duplication to describe foreign titles can exist.
Latvian: Marķīzs / Marķīze
Lithuanian: Markizas / Markizė
Estonian: Markii/Markiis or Markkrahv / Markkrahvinna
Finnish: Rajakreivi / Rajakreivitär or simply Markiisi / Markiisitar
Hungarian: Őrgróf (Márki) / Őrgrófnő (Márkinő) / Őrgrófné (consort of an Őrgróf)
Afrikaans: Markies, Markgraaf / Markiesin, Markgravin
Danish: Markis, Markgreve / Markise, Markgrevinde
Dutch: Markgraaf, Markies / Markgravin, Markiezin
Faroese: Markgreivi / Markgreivakona
German: Markgraf, Marquis / Markgräfin, Marquise
Icelandic: Markgreifi / Markgreifynja
Norwegian: Marki / Markise
Scots: Marquis / Marchioness
Swedish: Markis, Markgreve / Markisinna, Markgrevinna
Catalan: Marquès, Marcgravi / Marquesa
French: Marquis, Margrave / Marquise, Margravine
Italian: Margravio, Marchese / Marchesa (plur. Marchesi)
Latin: Marchio
Monegasque: Marchise / Marchisa
Portuguese: Marquês / Marquesa, Margrave / Margravina
Rhaeto-Romanic: Marchis / Marchesa
Romanian: Marchiz / Marchiză
Spanish: Marqués / Marquesa
Belarusian: Маркіз / Маркіза
Bosnian: Markiz / Markiza
Bulgarian: Маркиз / Маркиза
Croatian: Markiz, Markgrof / Markiza, Markgrofica
Czech: markýz / markýza
Macedonian: Маркиз / Маркиза
Polish: Margrabia, Markiz / Margrabina, Markiza
Russian: Маркиз / Маркиза
Serbian: Маркиз, Markiz / Markiza, Маркиза
Slovak: Markíz / Markíza
Slovene: Markiz, Mejni grof / Markiza, Mejna Grofica
Ukrainian: Маркіз / Маркіза
Albanian: Markiz / Markizë
Georgian: მარკიზი (Markizi)
Greek: Μαρκήσιος, Markēsios or Μαργράβος, Margravos / Μαρκησία, Markēsía
Hebrew: מרקיז (Markiz)
Irish: Marcas
Maltese: Markiż / Markiża
Turkish: Markiz
Welsh: Ardalydd / Ardalyddes
Like other major Western noble titles, marquess or marquis is sometimes used to render certain titles in non-Western languages with their own traditions, even though they are, as a rule, historically unrelated and thus hard to compare. However, they are considered "equivalent" in relative rank.
This is the case with:
In ancient China, 侯 (Hóu) was the second of five noble ranks created by King Wu of Zhou and is generally translated as marquess or marquis. In imperial China, 侯 (Hóu) is generally, but not always, a middle-to-high ranking hereditary nobility title. Its exact rank varies greatly from dynasty to dynasty, and even within a dynasty. It is often created with different sub-ranks.
In Meiji Japan, 侯爵 (Kōshaku), a hereditary peerage (Kazoku) rank, was introduced in 1884, granting a hereditary seat in the upper house of the imperial diet just as a British peerage did (until the House of Lords Act 1999), with the ranks usually rendered as baron, viscount, count, marquis and duke/prince.
In Korea, the title of 현후 (縣侯; Hyeonhu), of which the meaning is "marquess of district", existed for the hereditary nobility in the Goryeo dynasty. It was equivalent to the upper fifth rank of nine bureaucratic orders, and was in the third rank of six nobility orders. In the Joseon dynasty, there was no title equivalent to marquess.
In Vietnam's Annamite realm / empire, hầu (侯) was a senior title of hereditary nobility, equivalent to marquis, for male members of the imperial clan, ranking under hoàng-đế (emperor), vương (king/prince), quốc-công (grand duke/duke of the nation), quận-công (provincial duke) and công (duke, rather like a German Fürst), and above bá (count), tử (viscount) and nam (baron).
In the Thai royal and noble title Phraya (Phaya in dialects that elide /r/) which ranks below Chao Phraya (Duke) and above Phranai (Count or Earl.)
Marquesses in the United Kingdom
List of marquesses in the peerages of Britain and Ireland
List of marquessates in the peerages of Britain and Ireland
List of French marquisates
List of marquises in Norway
List of marquises in Portugal
Mark (county)
