Year 682 (DCLXXXII) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 682 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
King Erwig of the Visigoths continues oppression of the Jews in Spain. He makes it illegal to practice any Jewish rites (brit milah) and presses for the conversion or emigration of the remaining Jews.
Ghislemar becomes mayor of the palace in Neustria and Burgundy after he deposes his father Waratton. He reverses the peace treaty with Austrasia, signed with Pepin of Herstal at Namur.
King Ecgfrith requests Benedict Biscop to build a second monastery at Jarrow (Northumbria). Benedict leaves Monkwearmouth with 20 monks (including his protégé the young Bede).
The West Saxons, led by king Centwine, drive the Britons of Dumnonia (West Country) to the sea (possibly around Bideford).
The wandering ex-Wessex sub-king, Cædwalla, seeks St. Wilfrid as his spiritual father but does not convert to Christianity.
Muslim forces led by Uqba ibn Nafi overrun the south coast of the Mediterranean Sea. He occupies the cities Tripoli and Carthage, the last Byzantine bases in Africa (approximate date).
Due to a culmination of major droughts, floods, locust plagues, and epidemics, a widespread famine breaks out in the dual Chinese capital cities of Chang'an (primary capital) and Luoyang (secondary capital). The scarcity of food drives the price of grain to unprecedented heights, ending a once prosperous era under emperors Tai Zong and Gao Zong on a sad note.
Emperor Tenmu issues a decree forbidding the Japanese-style cap of ranks and garments, and changing them into Chinese ones. He also makes a decree forbidding men to wear leggings and women to let down their hair on their backs. It is from this time that the practice begins of women riding on horseback like men. He issues an edict prescribing the character of ceremonies and language to be used on occasions of ceremony. Ceremonial kneeling and crawling are both abolished, and the ceremonial custom of standing of the Tang court is practiced.
Jasaw Chan K'awiil I starts to rule in Tikal (modern Guatemala) during the Late Classic periode.
B'alaj Chan K'awiil begins a program to inscribe monuments recording his travails and ultimate victory during the Second Tikal-Calakmul War.
January 3 – Venus occults Jupiter.
The first entry is made in the Welsh chronicle Brut y Tywysogion.
August 17 – Pope Leo II succeeds Agatho as the 80th pope after a periode of sede vacante ("vacant seat") of a year and 7 months.
Clovis IV, king of the Franks (d. 695)
Li Chongrun, prince of the Tang Dynasty (d. 701)
July 20 – Taichō, Japanese Buddhist monk (d. 767)
November 2 – Umar II, Muslim caliph (d. 720)
Barbatus, bishop of Benevento
Bilal ibn al-Harith, companion of Muhammad (approximate date)
Bojang, king of Goguryeo (Korea)
Buyeo Yung, prince of Baekje (in exile in Luoyang)
Cadwaladr, king of Gwynedd (Wales)
Cenn Fáelad mac Colgan, king of Connacht (Ireland)
Li Jingxuan, chancellor of the Tang Dynasty (b. 615)
Maslama ibn Mukhallad al-Ansari, companion of Muhammad
Sun Simiao, Chinese medicine doctor
