Year 1100 (MC) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
The Ancient Pueblo Peoples culture rises (approximate date).
Oraibi becomes and remains the first and oldest populated settlement in what today is the USA and what is now Arizona.
The city of Cusco, Peru is founded.
The Liao Dynasty crushes the Zubu and takes their khan prisoner.
Song Dynasty China's population reaches roughly 100 million.
In the Song Dynasty capital of Kaifeng, the number of registered people within the walls is 1,050,000; the army stationed there boosts the overall populace to some 1.4 million people.
Emperor Huizong of Song starts to rule in China.
January – The Saljukid ruler Mahmud I is expelled from Bagdad by his brother, Barkiyaruq but Mahmud I manages to retake the city during his Spring offensive.
May or June – Raymond de Saint-Gilles sails to Byzantium to obtain the support of the emperor Alexios in his attempt to seize Tripoli.
August 1 – A Genoese fleets leaves Italy to support the Crusaders' effort to conquer the coastal cities, the ships reach Latakia on September 25.
August – Bohemond I of Antioch is captured by the Danishmends at the Battle of Melitene, leaving Tancred as regent of the Principality of Antioch for two years.
August 20 – With the support of the Venetian fleet, the Crusaders under Tancred of Hauteville capture the coastal city of Haifa.
December 25 – Baldwin I is crowned first King of Jerusalem at the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem by Dagobert of Pisa, the new Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem, following the death of the previous ruler, Baldwin's brother Godfrey of Bouillon, on July 18.
After a success over the Armenians of Cilicia and the emirate of Aleppo, Baldwin of Bourcq becomes Count of Edessa with the support of the patriarch Dagobert of Pisa.
Genoa, Venice and Pisa gain trading privileges from the Crusader states in return for their service during the conquest of the coastal cities.
August 2 – King William II of England dies in a hunting accident in the New Forest; his brother Henry I claims the throne.
August 5 – Henry I of England is crowned King of England at Westminster Abbey. The power of the new monarch is ill-assured and to mollify the barons he has to grant them the Charter of Liberties, one of the first examples of written constitution in Europe.
August 30 – After the failure of the Council of Liubech in 1097, the Congress of Vytechev establishes peace and the feudal system in Kievan Rus, the princes come to an agreement to share the country between them and Sviatopolk II of Kiev becomes the first Grand Prince.
September 16 – The Almoravid army defeats Castellan troops at the battle of Malagón (near modern-day Ciudad Real).
September 23 – Archbishop of Canterbury Anselm returns from exile at the invitation of Henry I of England.
October 18 – Peter I of Aragon conquers Barbastro (North) from the hands of the Almoravids.
November 18 – Opening of the council of Poitier which is soon forcibly closed by the duke of Aquitaine, William IX, as the bishops were about to excommunicate once more the king of France, Philip I.
December 25 – Philip I of France associates his son to the government of the realm.
In Iceland, the Althing decides that the laws should be transferred to a written form.
Intense urban activity in north and central Europe: Kalmar (Kungälv) and Varberg (Sweden) are chartered creation of the cities of Aach (southern Germany) and Nakléřov (in Bohemia, German: Nollendorf) and construction of the castle of Burgg Eppstein (central Germany).
Philip I of France conquers the Vexin area and adds the city of Bourges and the province of Berry to his estate.
Dagobert of Pisa becomes Latin Patriarch of Jerusalem.
At the death of antipope Clement III, the supporters of the Holy Roman Emperor in Rome choose Theodoric as his successor.
Frederick I of Schwarzburg becomes archbishop of Cologne and begins the construction of the castle of Volmarstein.
Foundation of the Stift St. Georgen abbey near Sankt Georgen am Längsee (Austria).
Foundation of the Diocese of Faroe (approx.)
Checkers is invented (approximate date).
May 23 – Emperor Qinzong of China (d. 1161)
Approximate date
Mary and Eliza Chulkhurst, English conjoined twins (d. 1134)
Gilbert de Clare, 1st Earl of Pembroke, English soldier (d. 1148)
Héloïse d'Argenteuil, French abbess, scholar and lover of Peter Abelard (d. 1162)
January 8 – Antipope Clement III
February 23 – Emperor Zhezong of China (b. 1077)
July 18 – Godfrey of Bouillon, King of Jerusalem
July 23 – Warner of Grez, crusader, relative of Godfrey
August 2 – William II of England
September 16 – Bernold of Constance, German chronicler
October 13 – Count Guy I of Ponthieu
November 11 – Archbishop Thomas I of York
December 22 – Duke Bretislav II of Bohemia
