Year 1088 (MLXXXVIII) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Mansur ibn Nasir succeeds Nasir ibn Alnas as ruler of the Hammadid Dynasty.
A rebellion in England against William II of England is led by Odo of Bayeux.
The 6.5 Ms Tmogvi earthquake affects the Kingdom of Georgia, causing severe damage and many deaths.
Almoravid campaign in al-Andalus. Yusuf ibn Tashfin besieges Aledo but is forced to retreat by the arrival on the scene of the troops of King Alfonso of Leon and Castile.
The troops of the count of Barcelona reconquer the ancient archiepiscopal see of Tarragona (lost again in 1108). Berenguer de Lluçanés becomes the city's new archbishop
The Dream Pool Essays is published in this year by the polymath Chinese scientist and statesman Shen Kuo. His book represents the earliest known writing about the magnetic compass, movable type printing, experimentation with the camera obscura only decades after Ibn al-Haytham, and includes many different fields of study in essay and encyclopedic form, including geology, astronomy, botany, zoology, mineralogy, anatomy, pharmacology, geography, optics, economics, military strategy, philosophy, etc. Some of Shen's most advanced theories include geomorphology and gradual climate change, while he improves Chinese astronomy by fixing the position of the pole star and correcting the lunar error by plotting its orbital course every night for a continuum of five years. Shen's book is also the first to describe the drydock in China, and discusses the advantages of the relatively recent invention of the canal pound lock over the old flash lock.
The Chinese polymath statesman and scientist Su Song has the successful pilot model for his astronomical clock tower constructed in Kaifeng, China. It features an escapement mechanism and the world's oldest known endless power-transmitting chain drive to operate the armillary sphere, opening doors, and mechanical-driven mannequins that would rotate in shifts to announce the time on plaques.
The oldest extant university, the University of Bologna, is founded.
March 12 – Pope Urban II succeeds Pope Victor III as the 159th pope.
Work begins on the third and largest church at Cluny.
date unknown – Saint Irene of Hungary, Byzantine empress (d. 1134)
January 6 – Berengar of Tours, French theologian
June 24 – William de Warenne, 1st Earl of Surrey, Norman aristocrat
date unknown – Naser Khosrow, Persian theologian
