Year 1173 (MCLXXIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
End of Qiandao era and start of Chunxi era of the Chinese Emperor Xiaozong of Song.
Saladin seizes Aden in Arabia.
January 5 – On the death of Bolesław IV the Curly, High Duke of Poland, he is succeeded by Mieszko III the Old, and as Duke of Sandomierz in Lesser Poland by Casimir II.
March - Henry the Young King withdraws to the French court, marking the beginning of the Revolt of 1173–74, in which Eleanor of Aquitaine and her sons rebel against her husband Henry II of England.
William de Braose, 3rd Lord of Bramber, becomes High Sheriff of Herefordshire in England.
Abergavenny Castle is seized by the Welsh.
Following the death of Kol Sverkerson, king Knut Eriksson extends his reign to also include Östergötland. He is now unopposed as king of Sweden.
The efforts of the Almohad caliph, Abu Yaqub Yusuf, to repopulate the western Andalusian city of Beja begin. They are rapidly abandoned, sign of the quick demographic weakening of the Muslim in the peninsula.
August 8 – The construction of a campanile which will become the Leaning Tower of Pisa begins.
Algebraic chess notation is first recorded.
February 21 – Canonisation of Thomas Becket; his tomb in Canterbury Cathedral becomes a shrine and popular pilgrimage destination.
Peter Waldo is converted to Christianity and founds the Waldensians.
Llywelyn the Great, Prince of Aberffraw and Lord of Eryri (approximate date; d. 1240)
Rostislav II of Kiev (d. 1214)
Shinran, Japanese founder of Jōdo Shinshū Buddhism (d. 1263)
Conrad II, Duke of Swabia (d. 1196)
Tankei, Japanese sculptor (d. 1256)
April 3 – Bolesław IV the Curly, High Duke of Poland (b. 1120)
August 9 – Najm ad-Din Ayyub, father of Saladin
October 6 – Engelbert III, Margrave of Istria
Roger de Clare, 2nd Earl of Hertford (b. 1116)
Vladimir III Mstislavich, Grand Prince of Kiev (b. 1132)
Richard of Saint Victor, French mystic and theologian
Benoît de Sainte-Maure, French poet and troubadour (b. 1154)
Kol Sverkerson, king of Östergötland (Sweden) since 1167
