Year 1352 (MCCCLII) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
June 4 – Glarus joins the Swiss Confederation.
June 27 – Zug joins the Swiss Confederation.
October – Fighting as allies of John VI Kantakouzenos in the Byzantine civil war of 1352–57, the Ottoman beylik scores its first victory on European soil at the Battle of Demotika against the Serbs.
December 18 – Pope Innocent VI succeeds Pope Clement VI as the 199th pope.
Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta reports the existence of the ngoni and balafon instruments at the court of Mansa Musa.
Dragoş becomes voivode of Moldova.
Corpus Christi College is founded as a College of the University of Cambridge, by the Guilds of Corpus Christi and the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Süleyman Pasha, the son of the Ottoman bey crosses the Bosphorus and seizes Çimpe Castle on the Gallipoli Peninsula, the first European territory held by the Ottoman Empire.
Lionel of Antwerp marries Elizabeth, daughter of William de Burgh, 3rd Earl of Ulster.
William de Ashlee becomes Rector of Maids Moreton, England.
The town of Biel/Bienne, Switzerland, finalizes its alliance with the city of Bern.
Reginald de Cobham, 1st Baron Cobham becomes a Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter of England.
The Earldom of Kent becomes extinct.
The Metropolitan of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Churchdid not exist yet, the Metropolitan of Halych, begins to relocate back to Kiev, after having moved to Halych in 1299. Thereafter, the Metropolitan will hold the title of Metropolitan of Kiev-Halych and All Rus.
After years of begging and being a Buddhist monk, the penniless Chinese peasant Zhu Yuanzhang joins the Red Turban Rebellion against the Mongol-led Yuan dynasty of China; he will later become the first emperor of the Ming dynasty.
May 5 – Rupert of Germany, Count Palatine of the Rhine (d. 1410)
date unknown
John Holland, 1st Duke of Exeter (d. 1400)
Vytautas the Great, Grand Duke of Lithuania (d. 1430)
July 3 – Archbishop Vasilii Kalika of Novgorod
September 15 – Ewostatewos, Ethiopian monk and religious leader (b. 1273)
December 6 – Pope Clement VI (b. 1291)
date unknown
Matthias of Arras, French architect (b. 1290)
William de Ros, 3rd Baron de Ros (b. 1325)
Basarab I of Wallachia
Al-Hakim II, Caliph of Cairo
Laurence Minot, English poet (b. 1300)
Yoshida Kenkō, Japanese monk and author (b. 1283)
