Year 1169 (MCLXIX) was a common year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Nur ad-Din, atabeg of Aleppo, invades Egypt, and on March 26 names his nephew Saladin sultan as well as vizier of Cairo.
January – Henry II of England and Louis VII of France sign a peace treaty which includes the betrothal of their respective heirs, twelve-year-old Richard I of England and nine-year-old Alys, Countess of the Vexin.
February 4 – 1169 Sicily earthquake: An earthquake with an estimated magnitude of around 7 strikes the eastern coast of Sicily, causing an estimated 15,000 deaths.
May 1 – Norman invasion of Ireland begins. Among those arriving is Cambro-Norman knight (and vassal of Henry II of England) Richard de Clare who has made an alliance with exiled Irish chief Diarmait Mac Murchada to help him regain the throne of Leinster. This begins the period of Anglo-Norman dominance of Ireland.
Siege of Badajoz by Gerald the Fearless. The adventurer receives the support of the Afonso I of Portugal. The Almohad caliph, Abu Yaqub Yusuf, manages to broker an alliance with the King Ferdinand II of León against Afonso. The allies manage to besiege the Portuguese in Badajoz and finally to take both the king and Gerald prisoners.
During the Swedish power struggle, Boleslaw is killed, but his brother Kol continues as king of Östergötland until 1173, in opposition to king Knut Eriksson of Sweden.
The appointed Bishop of Estonia, Fulco, becomes the first known Christian missionary to visit Estonia.
Prince Andrey Bogolyubsky of Vladimir-Suzdal sacks Kiev and makes Vladimir the capital of Kievan Rus'.
Eleanor of Aquitaine leaves the English court of Henry II to establish her own court in Poitiers. It will become known as a center of courtly love.
September 10 – Alexius II Comnenus, Byzantine Emperor (d. 1183)
January 2 – Bertrand de Blanchefort, sixth Grand Master of the Knights Templar (b. c. 1109)
July 9 – Guido of Ravenna, Italian cartographer, entomologist and historian
Stephen du Perche, chancellor of Sicily and archbishop of Palermo
Boleslaw Sverkerson, king of Östergötland (Sweden) since 1167
