Year 1179 (MCLXXIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
23–30 August – Battle of Jacob's Ford , Syria
Saladin destroys the still in construction Castle of Chastellet at Jacob's Ford, killing 700 knights and taking 800 civilians captive.
The Maya city of Chichen Itza is sacked and burned by Hunac Ceel, the Mayapan king.
June 19 – Battle of Kalvskinnet (outside Nidaros, Norway): Earl Erling Skakke is killed, and the battle changes the tide of the civil wars.
Afonso I is recognized as King of Portugal by Pope Alexander III, bringing Portugal the protection of the Catholic Church against the Leonese monarchy.
November 1 – Philip II is crowned King of France. He assumes his office, however, in the next year, following the death of his father Louis VII.
The city of Aberdeen is chartered by William the Lion.
Large offensive by the Almohad army in southern Portugal aiming at the reconquest of the Alentejo. Further north, a fleet led by Abd Allah b. Ishaq b. Jami is sailing to attack Lisbon but is repelled by the Portuguese admiral D. Fuas Roupinho near the Cape Espichel. The Portuguese admiral later manages to enter in the harbor of Ceuta and destroy a number of Muslim ships. It is the beginning of a four-year naval conflict between Almohads and Portuguese.
The Third Council of the Lateran condemns Waldensians and Cathars as heretics, institutes a reformation of clerical life, and creates the first "ghettos" for Jews. It also rules that the Pope must receive 2/3 of the cardinals' votes to be elected.
Westminster School is founded by the monks of Westminster Abbey (by papal command) in England.
The Drigung Kagyu school of Kagyu Buddhism is founded.
John of Ibelin, the Old Lord of Beirut (approximate date; d. 1236)
Michael of Chernigov (approximate date; d. 1246)
Shimazu Tadahisa, warlord of the Shimazu clan of Japan (d. 1227)
William IV Talvas, Count of Ponthieu (d. 1221)
Yaqut al-Hamawi, Arab geographer (d. 1229)
September 17 – Hildegard of Bingen, German abbess, mystic writer, and composer (b. 1098)
Taira no Shigemori, Japanese rebel (b. 1138)
