Year 1150 (MCL) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Cubbie Roo's Castle is built on Wyre, Orkney.
A Benedictine priory is founded at Birkenhead, England, resulting in the first recorded Mersey Ferry.
Christchurch Priory is founded in Dorset, England.
Castle Rising is built in Norfolk, England by William d'Aubigny, 1st Earl of Arundel.
The University of Paris, now known as the Sorbonne, is founded.
Christian Malone writes his Irish Chronology (Chronicum Scotorum).
The city of Neuruppin is founded in Brandenburg, Germany.
The city of Rinteln is founded in Lower Saxony, Germany.
Middle Dutch begins to be spoken in the Low Countries.
Peter the Lombard publishes Sentences.
Foundation of Dryburgh Abbey by Hugh de Morville, Lord of Cunningham the Constable of Scotland
The first doctorate degree is awarded in Paris, France.
Battle of Tara, fought between the Byzantine Empire and Serbian Grand Principality backed by the Kingdom of Hungary.
Joscelin II of Edessa is taken prisoner during the Second Crusade.
The city of Ashkelon is fortified with 53 towers by Fatimid rulers.
The earliest textual reference is made to Gypsies working as musicians in Constantinople.
The temple at Angkor Wat is completed in Khmer (present-day Cambodia).
July-August – Alix of France, daughter of Louis VII of France (d. 1198)
date unknown
Leo I, King of Armenia (d. 1229)
William de Braose, 4th Lord of Bramber (approximate date; d. 1211)
Rosamund Clifford, mistress of Henry II of England (approximate date; d. 1176)
Saxo Grammaticus, Danish historian (d. 1220)
Baldwin V, Count of Hainaut (d. 1195)
Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury (approximate date; d. 1228)
January 9 – Emperor Xizong of Jin, third ruler of the Jurchen Jin Dynasty (b. 1119)
April 8 – Gertrude of Babenberg, Duchess of Bohemia (b. c.1118)
November 21 – García Ramírez of Navarre "the Restorer" (b. c.1112)
date unknown
Suryavarman II, Khmer king, builder of Angkor Wat
Barisan of Ibelin, figure in the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem
Pribislav of Brandenburg, last king of the Hevelli (b. c. 1075)
