Year 64 (LXIV) was a leap year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Bassus and Crassus (or, less frequently, year 817 Ab urbe condita). The denomination 64 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
July 19 – Great Fire of Rome: A fire begins in the merchant area of Rome and soon burns completely out of control, while emperor Nero allegedly plays his lyre and sings as he watches the blaze from a safe distance. There is no hard evidence to support this claim: fires were very common in Rome at the time. The fire destroys close to one-half of the city and it is officially blamed on the Christians, a small but growing religious movement. Nero is accused of being the arsonist by popular rumour.
Persecution of Christians in Rome begins under Emperor Nero. Peter the Apostle is possibly among those executed.
Nero proposes a new urban planning program based the creation of buildings decorated with ornate porticos, the widening of the streets and the use of open spaces. This plan will not be applied until after his death in 68.
Lyon sends a large sum of money to Rome to aid in the reconstruction. However, during the winter of 64–65, Lyon suffers a catastrophic fire itself, and Nero reciprocates by sending money to Lyon.
Phoenicia becomes part of Syria.
The Kushan sack the town of Taxila (in present-day Pakistan).
The year the First Epistle of Peter is traditionally believed to be written.
Seneca proclaims the equality of all men, including slaves.
September 13 – Julia Flavia, daughter of Roman Emperor Titus, lover of his brother Domitian (d. 96 AD)
Philo of Byblos, Phoenician historical writer (d. 141)
October 13 — Peter the Apostle (Margherita Guarducci, who led the research leading to the rediscovery of Peter's reputed tomb in 1963, concluded that Peter died on that date, shortly after the Great Fire of Rome and during the festivities to mark "dies imperii" of Emperor Nero, and that Peter and other Christians were crucified in honor of the decennial of Nero's October 13, 54 ascension to the imperial throne.) (b. 1 BC)
Paul the Apostle (earliest date) (b. 5 AD)
Empress Yin Lihua (b. 5)
First Martyrs of the Church of Rome
