Year 197 (CXCVII) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Magius and Rufinus (or, less frequently, year 950 Ab urbe condita). The denomination 197 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
February 19 – Battle of Lugdunum: Emperor Septimius Severus defeats the self-proclaimed emperor Clodius Albinus at Lugdunum (modern Lyon). Albinus commits suicide; legionaries sack the town.
Septimius Severus returns to Rome and has about 30 of Albinus's supporters in the Senate executed. After his victory he declares himself the adopted son of the late Marcus Aurelius.
Septimius Severus forms new naval units, manning all the triremes in Italy with heavily armed troops for war in the East. His soldiers embark on an artificial canal between the Tigris and Euphrates.
Legio I, II, and III Parthica are levied by Septimius Severus for his Parthian campaign.
The Roman army marches east to repel a Parthian invasion of Mesopotamia; they loot the royal palace at Ctesiphon and capture an enormous number of its inhabitants as slaves.
Septimius Severus reconstitutes the Province of Mesopotamia under an equestrian governor commanding two legions.
Septimius Severus, who had spared the Senate at the beginning of his reign, now excludes it from controlling the Roman empire by declaring a military dictatorship.
Battle of Wancheng: Zhang Xiu launches a surprise attack at Cao Cao.
Yuan Shu declares himself emperor of the short-lived Zhong dynasty.
Galen's major work on medicines, Pharmacologia, is published.
A Christian council is held in Edessa.
Deng Ai, Wei general (d. 264)
Empress Cao, daughter of Cao Cao and wife of Emperor Xian of Han (d. 260)
February 19 – Clodius Albinus, rival for Roman Emperor (b. 150)
Cao Ang, first son of Cao Cao (b. 177)
Cao Anmin, nephew of Cao Cao
Dian Wei, bodyguard to warlord Cao Cao
Guo Si, general under Dong Zhuo (b. 146)
Han Yin, advisor to Yuan Shu
Han Xian, general during the Han Dynasty
Huche'er, general under Zhang Xiu
Liang Gang, general under Yuan Shu
Qiao Rui, general during the Han Dynasty
Sima Jun, politician during the Han Dynasty, Grandfather of Sima Yi, (b. 113)
Yang Feng, Chinese cavalry general
Yue Jiu, general during the Han Dynasty
