Year 575 (DLXXV) was a common year starting on Tuesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 575 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
The Franks under Sigibert I pursue his half brother Chilperic I, and conquer the cities Poitiers and Tournai. While he is proclaimed new king of Neustria by the nobles, Sigibert is assassinated at Vitry-en-Artois (Northern Gaul) by hirelings of Fredegund.
Childebert II succeeds his father Sigibert I as king of Austrasia. His mother Brunhilda becomes regent and seeks protection from Guntram, king of Burgundy. He adopts Childebert as his own son and heir. A group of Frankish aristocrats rule Austrasia.
The Visigoths under king Liuvigild invade the Suebian Kingdom (Northern Spain). Intermarriage between Goths and non-Goths is allowed in the Visigothic Kingdom (approximate date).
The Convention of Druim Cett: Irish kings discuss the relationship between king Áedán mac Gabráin of Dál Riata. The Irish colony (now western Scotland) is confirmed, rights to tax and levy are agreed between the rulers.
The Anglo-Saxon kingdom of East Anglia is divided in the English counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, and perhaps the eastern part of the Cambridgeshire Fens (approximate date).
Byzantine–Sassanid War: A Byzantine army under command of Maurice drive the Persians from Cappodocia (modern Turkey) and strengthen the position in Caucasian Albania.
Alexander of Tralles, Greek physician, writes "Libri duodecim de re Medica" (approximate date).
Tardu succeeds his father Istämi as governor (yabgu) of the Western Turkic Khaganate (Central Asia).
Zhiyi, Chinese monk, travels to Mount Tiantai for intensive study and practice. He works with a group of disciples on the Indian meditation of śamatha and vipaśyanā.
June 2 – Pope Benedict I succeeds Pope John III as the 62nd pope.
Al-Khansa, Arabic poet (d. 645)
Heraclius, emperor of the Byzantine Empire (approximate date)
Wen Yanbo, chancellor of the Tang Dynasty (d. 637)
Áed mac Echach, king of Connacht (Ireland)
Cerbonius, bishop of Populonia (Central Italy)
Istämi, ruler (yabgu) of the Western Turkic Khaganate
Sigebert I, king of Austrasia (approximate date)
