Year 1284 (MCCLXXXIV) was a leap year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
Putting an end to the Bedouin rebellion that had toppled his brother in 1283, Abu Hafs Umar I reconquers Tunis and reinstalls the Hafsids as the dominating dynasty in Ifriqiya.
Peter III of Aragon takes advantage of the weakness of the Hafsid dynasty and raids the island of Jerba. The Aragonese massacre the population and occupy the island.
Mamluk sultan of Egypt Al Mansur Qalawun signs a ten-year truce with the Crusader city of Acre; he will violate the truce on pretexts in 1290.
The Mongol Golden Horde, led by Nogai Khan, attacks Hungary a second time.
The Byzantine city Tralles falls to the Turkish emirate of Menteşe. Twenty thousand people are led off as slaves.
March 3 – The Statute of Rhuddlan extends English law to Wales.
June 5 – King Charles II of Naples is captured in the Battle of the Gulf of Naples by Roger of Lauria, admiral to King Peter III of Aragon.
August 5–6 – Battle of Meloria: The Italian city-state of Genoa defeats its rival Pisa at sea, ending Pisa's marine power and hastening the city's decline in power.
King Stefan Dragutin of Serbia receives Belgrade, Syrmia, and other territories from Hungary, when his son marries the king of Hungary's cousin.
The Kingdom of Germany imposes a trade embargo on Norway, due to the latter pillaging a German ship. The embargo cuts off vital supplies of grain, flour, vegetables and beer, causing a general famine.
The German city of Hamburg is destroyed by a fire.
The events giving rise to the story of the Pied Piper of Hamelin take place in Lower Saxony.
Construction of Beauvais Cathedral is interrupted by a partial collapse of the choir; the event unnerves French masons working in the Gothic style.
Jean de Meun translates Vegetius' 4th century military treatise De Re Militari from Latin into French.
Peterhouse, the oldest collegiate foundation of the University of Cambridge in England, is established by Hugh de Balsham, Bishop of Ely.
Completion of the al-Mansuri bimaristan (hospital) in Cairo.
The Republic of Venice begins coining the ducat, a gold coin that is to become the standard of European coinage for the following six hundred years.
April 25 – King Edward II of England (d. 1327)
date unknown
John I, Count of Holland (d. 1299)
Edward, Count of Savoy (d. 1329)
March 24 – Hugh III of Cyprus (b., 1235)
April – Adelaide of Holland, regent of Holland (b. c.1230)
April 4 – King Alfonso X of Castile (b. 1221)
April 20 – Hōjō Tokimune, regent of Japan (b. 1251)
August 10 – Tekuder, Khan of the Mongol Ilkhanate (executed)
August 19 – Alphonso, Earl of Chester, son of Edward I of England (b. 1273)
