The year 1970 in film involved some significant events.
The top ten 1970 released films by box office gross in North America are as follows:
January 9 - Larry Fine, the second member of The Three Stooges, suffers a massive stroke, effectively ending his career.
February 11 - The Magic Christian, starring Peter Sellers and Ringo Starr, premieres in New York City. The film's soundtrack album, including Badfinger's "Come and Get It" (written and produced by Paul McCartney), is released on Apple Records.
March 12 - Film debut of Ornella Muti in La moglie più bella (The Most Beautiful Wife) 3 days after her 15th birthday.
March 17 - The controversial film The Boys in the Band, directed by William Friedkin and based on Mart Crowley's hit off-Broadway play, opens in theaters.
October 24 - Joan Crawford's final film, the low-budget horror picture Trog, opens in theaters.
The IMAX motion picture projection system premieres at the Fuji Pavilion, at Expo '70 in Osaka, Japan.
In Culver City, California, MGM begins selling off its studio back lot property and movie props.
Academy Awards:
Best Picture: Patton - 20th Century Fox
Best Director: Darryl F. Zanuck accepting on behalf of Franklin J. Schaffner - Patton
Best Actor: Darryl F. Zanuck accepting on behalf of George C. Scott - Patton (declined)
Best Actress: Anne Francis accepting on behalf of Glenda Jackson - Women in Love
Best Supporting Actor: Juliet Mills accepting on behalf of John Mills - Ryan's Daughter
Best Supporting Actress: Angela Lansbury accepting on behalf of Helen Hayes - Airport
Best Foreign Language Film: Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion (Indagine su un cittadino al di sopra di ogni sospetto), directed by Elio Petri, Italy
Golden Globe Awards:
Drama:
Best Picture: Love Story
Best Actor: George C. Scott – Patton
Best Actress: Ali MacGraw – Love Story
Musical or comedy:
Best Picture: MASH
Best Actor: Albert Finney – Scrooge
Best Actress: Carrie Snodgress – Diary of a Mad Housewife
Other
Best Director: Arthur Hiller, Love Story
Cannes Film Festival (Palme d'Or):
MASH, directed by Robert Altman, United States
U.S.A. unless stated
#
7 Plus Seven, a TV documentary directed by Michael Apted - (U.K.)
A
The Act of the Heart, starring Geneviève Bujold and Donald Sutherland - (Canada)
The Adventurers, starring Candice Bergen, Bekim Fehmiu, Olivia de Havilland, Ernest Borgnine
The Adventures of Gerard, starring Peter McEnery, Claudia Cardinale, Eli Wallach, Jack Hawkins
Airport, directed by George Seaton, starring Burt Lancaster, Dean Martin, Jean Seberg, Jacqueline Bisset, Van Heflin, George Kennedy, Helen Hayes
Alex in Wonderland, directed by Paul Mazursky, starring Donald Sutherland
The American Soldier (Der amerikanische Soldat), diredted by Rainer Werner Fassbinder - (West Germany)
And Soon the Darkness, starring Pamela Franklin - (U.K.)
The Angel Levine, starring Zero Mostel and Harry Belafonte
The Aristocats - an animated Disney film featuring Phil Harris and Eva Gabor
Awakening of the Beast (O Ritual dos Sádicos) - (Brazil)
B
The Baby Maker, starring Barbara Hershey and Sam Groom
The Ballad of Cable Hogue, directed by Sam Peckinpah, starring Jason Robards and Stella Stevens
The Bear and the Doll (L'ours et la poupée), starring Brigitte Bardot and Jean-Pierre Cassel - (France)
Bed and Board (Domicile Conjugal), directed by François Truffaut, starring Jean-Pierre Léaud - (France)
Behold Homolka (Ecce homo Homolka) - (Czechoslovakia)
The Beloved, starring Raquel Welch - (U.K.)
Beneath the Planet of the Apes, starring James Franciscus, Kim Hunter, Maurice Evans
Beyond the Valley of the Dolls, directed by Russ Meyer, starring Dolly Read
The Bird with the Crystal Plumage (L'uccello dalle piume di cristallo), directed by Dario Argento - (Italy)
Black Brigade, starring Stephen Boyd and Richard Pryor
Bloody Mama, directed by Roger Corman, starring Shelley Winters, Pat Hingle, Don Stroud, Robert De Niro
The Boatniks, starring Robert Morse, Stefanie Powers and Phil Silvers
The Body, a documentary narrated by Frank Finlay and Vanessa Redgrave - (U.K.)
Borsalino, starring Jean-Paul Belmondo and Alain Delon - (France)
El bosque del lobo (a.k.a. The Ancines Woods) - (Spain)
The Boys in the Band, directed by William Friedkin
Brancaleone at the Crusades (Brancaleone alle Crociate), starring Vittorio Gassman and Adolfo Celi - (Italy)
The Breach, directed by Claude Chabrol - (France/Italy/Belgium)
Brewster McCloud, directed by Robert Altman, starring Bud Cort, Sally Kellerman, Michael Murphy, Shelley Duvall
The Brotherhood of the Bell, starring Glenn Ford, Rosemary Forsyth and Maurice Evans
The Butcher (Le Boucher), directed by Claude Chabrol, starring Stéphane Audran and Jean Yanne - (France)
C
Cannon for Cordoba, starring George Peppard
Carry On Up the Jungle, starring Sid James, Kenneth Connor, Frankie Howerd - (U.K.)
Case for a Rookie Hangman
Catch-22, directed by Mike Nichols, starring Alan Arkin, Jon Voight, Richard Benjamin, Bob Newhart, Charles Grodin, Orson Welles, Art Garfunkel
C.C. and Company, starring Joe Namath, Ann-Margret and William Smith
Le Cercle Rouge (The Red Circle), directed by Jean-Pierre Melville, starring Alain Delon, Bourvil, Yves Montand, Gian Maria Volontè - (France)
Chariots of the Gods (Erinnerungen an die Zukunft), documentary - (West Germany)
The Cheyenne Social Club, directed by Gene Kelly, starring James Stewart and Henry Fonda
Chisum, starring John Wayne, Ben Johnson, Forrest Tucker, Christopher George, Glenn Corbett
Claire's Knee (Le genou de Claire), directed by Éric Rohmer - (France)
Cockeyed Cowboys of Calico County, starring Dan Blocker and Nanette Fabray
Colossus: The Forbin Project, starring Eric Braeden and Susan Clark
Compañeros, starring Franco Nero and Jack Palance - (Italy)
The Confession (L'Aveu), directed by Costa-Gavras, starring Yves Montand and Simone Signoret - (France/Italy)
The Conformist (Il conformista), directed by Bernardo Bertolucci, starring Jean-Louis Trintignant and Stefania Sandrelli - (Italy/France)
Connecting Rooms, starring Bette Davis and Michael Redgrave - (U.K.)
Cotton Comes to Harlem, starring Godfrey Cambridge, Raymond St. Jacques, Calvin Lockhart, Redd Foxx
Count Dracula, starring Christopher Lee, Klaus Kinski and Herbert Lom- (Italy)
Country Dance, starring Peter O'Toole
Crescendo, starring Stefanie Powers
Crime and Punishment (Prestuplenie i nakazanie) - (U.S.S.R.)
Crimes of the Future, directed by David Cronenberg - (Canada)
Cromwell, directed by Ken Hughes, starring Richard Harris and Alec Guinness - (U.K.)
The Cross and the Switchblade, starring Pat Boone and Erik Estrada
D
Darker than Amber, starring Rod Taylor and Jane Russell
Darling Lili, directed by Blake Edwards, starring Julie Andrews and Rock Hudson
Days and Nights in the Forest (Aranyer Din Ratri), directed by Satyajit Ray - (India)
Deep End, directed by Jerzy Skolimowski, starring Jane Asher - (U.K./West Germany)
The Delta Factor, starring Yvette Mimieux and Christopher George
Diary of a Mad Housewife, directed by Frank Perry, starring Carrie Snodgress (Golden Globe winner), Richard Benjamin, Frank Langella
Dirty Dingus Magee, starring Frank Sinatra
Dodes'ka-den, directed by Akira Kurosawa - (Japan)
The Dunwich Horror, starring Dean Stockwell and Sandra Dee
E
Eden and After (L'Eden et après / Eden a potom), directed by Alain Robbe-Grillet - (France/Czechoslovakia)
El Condor, starring Jim Brown and Lee Van Cleef
El Topo (The Mole) - (Mexico)
Elise, or Real Life (Élise ou la vraie vie) - (France)
End of the Road, starring Stacy Keach, Harris Yulin, James Earl Jones
Entertaining Mr Sloane, starring Beryl Reid and Harry Andrews - (U.K.)
Equinox, starring Frank Bonner
Eugenie the Story of Her Journey Into Perversion, starring Marie Liljedahl, Maria Rohm and Christopher Lee - (Spain)
Even Dwarfs Started Small (Auch Zwerge haben klein angefangen), directed by Werner Herzog - (West Germany)
F
Figures in a Landscape, directed by Joseph Losey, starring Robert Shaw - (U.K.)
Five Easy Pieces, directed by Bob Rafelson, starring Jack Nicholson, Susan Anspach and Karen Black
The Flight (Beg) - (U.S.S.R.)
Four Murders Are Enough, Darling (Čtyři vraždy stačí, drahoušku) - (Czechoslovakia)
Fragment of Fear, starring David Hemmings and Gayle Hunnicutt - (U.K.)
Fruit of Paradise (Ovoce stromů rajských jíme) - (Czechoslovakia)
G
Gamera vs. Jiger - (Japan)
The Games, directed by Michael Winner, starring Michael Crawford, Ryan O'Neal, Charles Aznavour - (U.K.)
The Garden of the Finzi-Continis, directed by Vittorio De Sica - Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film 1971 and Golden Bear winner - (Italy)
Getting Straight, starring Elliott Gould and Candice Bergen
Gimme Shelter, a documentary featuring The Rolling Stones
Gods of the Plague (Götter der Pest), diredted by Rainer Werner Fassbinder - (West Germany)
Goodbye Gemini, starring Judy Geeson, Martin Potter, Michael Redgrave and Alexis Kanner- (U.K.)
Goin' Down the Road - (Canada)
The Great White Hope, directed by Martin Ritt, starring James Earl Jones and Jane Alexander
The Green Wall (La muralla verde) - (Peru)
H
Halls of Anger , starring Calvin Lockhart and Jeff Bridges
The Hawaiians, starring Charlton Heston
Hello-Goodbye, starring Michael Crawford
Hercules in New York, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger
History of Postwar Japan as Told by a Bar Hostess (Nippon Sengoshi – Madamu onboro no Seikatsu), directed by Shohei Imamura - (Japan)
Hoffman, starring Peter Sellers and Sinéad Cusack - (U.K.)
Hornets’ Nest, starring Rock Hudson
The Horror of Frankenstein, starring Ralph Bates, Kate O'Mara and Veronica Carlson- (U.K.)
Horton Hears a Who!, TV animated film
House of Dark Shadows, directed by Dan Curtis, starring Jonathan Frid and Grayson Hall
How Do I Love Thee?, starring Jackie Gleason and Maureen O'Hara
Husbands, directed by and starring John Cassavetes, with Ben Gazzara and Peter Falk
I
I Love My Wife, directed by Mel Stuart, starring Elliott Gould, Brenda Vaccaro, Angel Tompkins
I Never Sang for My Father, directed by Gilbert Cates, starring Gene Hackman, Estelle Parsons, Melvyn Douglas
The Intruders, starring Don Murray, John Saxon and Anne Francis
Investigation of a Citizen Above Suspicion, directed by Elio Petri, starring Gian Maria Volontè - Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film 1970 - (Italy)
The Invincible Six, directed by Jean Negulesco, starring Stuart Whitman and Elke Sommer
I Walk the Line, directed by John Frankenheimer, starring Gregory Peck and Tuesday Weld
J
El jardín de las delicias (The Garden of Delights), directed by Carlos Saura - (Spain)
Jenny, starring Marlo Thomas and Alan Alda
Joe, directed by John G. Avildsen, starring Peter Boyle and Susan Sarandon
Julius Caesar, directed by Stuart Burge, starring Charlton Heston, Jason Robards, John Gielgud - (U.K.)
K
Kati Patang, starring Rajesh Khanna - (India)
Kazoku - (Japan)
Kelly's Heroes, starring Clint Eastwood, Telly Savalas, Carroll O'Connor, Donald Sutherland, Don Rickles
Khilona (Toy) - (India)
King: A Filmed Record... Montgomery to Memphis, a documentary on Martin Luther King, Jr. directed by Sidney Lumet
The Kremlin Letter, directed by John Huston, starring Patrick O'Neal, Barbara Parkins, Bibi Andersson, Nigel Green, Orson Welles
L
The Landlord, directed by Hal Ashby, starring Beau Bridges, Lee Grant, Diana Sands, Pearl Bailey, Louis Gossett, Jr.
Landscape After the Battle (Krajobraz po bitwie), directed by Andrzej Wajda - (Poland)
Last of the Mobile Hot Shots, starring James Coburn
The Last Warrior, aka Flap, starring Anthony Quinn, Shelley Winters, Tony Bill
Leo the Last, directed by John Boorman, starring Marcello Mastroianni and Billie Whitelaw - (U.K.)
Let It Be - documentary film directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg and featuring The Beatles - (U.K.)
The Liberation of L.B. Jones, directed by William Wyler, starring Roscoe Lee Browne, Anthony Zerbe, Lee J. Cobb, Lola Falana, Barbara Hershey
Little Big Man, directed by Arthur Penn, starring Dustin Hoffman, Faye Dunaway, Chief Dan George
Little Fauss and Big Halsy, starring Robert Redford and Michael J. Pollard
The Little Theatre of Jean Renoir, a TV film - (France/Italy/West Germany)
Loot, directed by Silvio Narizzano, starring Richard Attenborough, Lee Remick, Hywel Bennett - (U.K.)
Lost in the Desert (a.k.a. Dirkie), directed by Jamie Uys - (South Africa)
Love Story, directed by Arthur Hiller, starring Ali MacGraw and Ryan O'Neal - winner of 5 Golden Globes including best picture and best director
Lovers and Other Strangers, starring Cloris Leachman, Beatrice Arthur, Richard Castellano, Diane Keaton
Loving, starring George Segal and Eva Marie Saint
M
MASH, directed by Robert Altman, starring Donald Sutherland, Elliott Gould, Tom Skerritt, Robert Duvall, Michael Murphy, Sally Kellerman, Jo Ann Pflug
Macho Callahan, starring Jean Seberg, David Janssen, Lee J. Cobb
Maidstone, written, directed by and starring Norman Mailer
A Man Called Horse, starring Richard Harris
The Man Who Haunted Himself, starring Roger Moore, Anton Rodgers and Hildegarde Neil - (U.K.)
Metello - (Italy)
Michael the Brave (Mihai Viteazul) - (Romania)
The Molly Maguires, directed by Martin Ritt, starring Sean Connery and Richard Harris
Monte Walsh, starring Lee Marvin, Jack Palance, Jeanne Moreau
The Moonshine War, starring Alan Alda, Richard Widmark, Patrick McGoohan
Move, starring Paula Prentiss and Elliott Gould
The Music Lovers, directed by Ken Russell, starring Richard Chamberlain and Glenda Jackson - (U.K.)
Mumsy, Nanny, Sonny and Girly, starring Michael Bryant, Ursula Howells, Pat Heywood and Vanessa Howard- (U.K.)
Myra Breckinridge, starring Raquel Welch, Mae West, John Huston, Farrah Fawcett, Rex Reed
N
The Nameless Knight - (Turkey)
Ned Kelly, starring Mick Jagger - (U.K.)
Norwood, starring Glen Campbell, Kim Darby, Joe Namath
O
o.k., directed by Michael Verhoeven - (West Germany)
Of Gods and the Undead (Os Deuses e os Mortos) - (Brazil)
On a Clear Day You Can See Forever, directed by Vincente Minnelli, starring Barbra Streisand and Yves Montand, songs by Alan Jay Lerner
One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, starring Tom Courtenay - (U.K./Norway)
One More Time, directed by Jerry Lewis, starring Sammy Davis, Jr. and Peter Lawford
One Song a Day Takes Mischief Away (Tko pjeva zlo ne misli) - (Yugoslavia)
On the Comet
The Out-of-Towners, directed by Arthur Hiller, starring Jack Lemmon and Sandy Dennis
The Over-the-Hill Gang Rides Again, starring Walter Brennan, Chill Wills, Fred Astaire
The Owl and the Pussycat, directed by Herbert Ross, starring Barbra Streisand and George Segal
P
The Palace of Angels (O Palácio dos Anjos) - (Brazil)
The Past-Master (Bash Maystorat), directed by Petar B. Vasilev, starring Kiril Gospodinov and Yuriy Yakovlev - (Bulgaria)
Patton, directed by Franklin J. Schaffner, starring George C. Scott - winner of 7 Academy Awards for 1971 including best picture, director and actor
Peace in the Fields (Paix sur les champs) - (Belgium)
Peau d'Âne (Donkey Skin), directed by Jacques Demy, starring Catherine Deneuve and Jean Marais - (France)
The People Next Door, starring Eli Wallach and Julie Harris
Perfect Friday, starring Ursula Andress and Stanley Baker
Performance (filmed in 1968), directed by Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg, starring James Fox and Mick Jagger - (U.K.)
The Phantom Tollbooth
The Pizza Triangle (Dramma della gelosia), directed by Ettore Scola, starring Marcello Mastroianni and Monica Vitti - (Italy)
The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes, directed by Billy Wilder, starring Robert Stephens, Geneviève Page, Colin Blakely - (U.K.)
Purab Aur Paschim (East and West), starring Ashok Kumar - (India)
Puzzle of a Downfall Child, starring Faye Dunaway
Q
Quackser Fortune Has a Cousin in the Bronx, starring Gene Wilder and Margot Kidder - (Ireland)
¡Qué hacer! (What to Do?) - (Chile)
R
Rabbit, Run, directed by Jack Smight, starring James Caan
The Railway Children, directed by Lionel Jeffries, starring Jenny Agutter - (U.K.)
The Rebel Rousers, starring Jack Nicholson
The Revolutionary, starring Jon Voight
Rio Lobo, directed by Howard Hawks, starring John Wayne, Jorge Rivero, Jennifer O'Neill, Jack Elam, Sherry Lansing
The Rise and Rise of Michael Rimmer, starring Peter Cook, Denholm Elliott, Arthur Lowe - (U.K.)
R. P. M., directed by Stanley Kramer, starring Anthony Quinn and Ann-Margret
Reza Motorcyclist (Reza Motori) (1970) - directed by Masoud Kimiai (Iran)
Ryan's Daughter, directed by David Lean, starring Robert Mitchum, Sarah Miles, John Mills (Oscar winner) - (U.K.)
S
Salt of the Black Earth (Sól ziemi czarnej) - (Poland)
Scars of Dracula, starring Christopher Lee, Dennis Waterman and Jenny Hanley - (U.K.)
Scream and Scream Again, starring Vincent Price, Alfred Marks and Christopher Lee- (U.K.)
Scrooge, directed by Ronald Neame, with Albert Finney, Alec Guinness, Edith Evans - (U.K.)
Skullduggery, starring Burt Reynolds and Susan Clark
Soldier Blue, directed by Ralph Nelson, starring Candice Bergen and Peter Strauss
Something for Everyone, directed by Harold Prince, starring Angela Lansbury and Michael York
Space Amoeba, directed by Ishirō Honda - (Japan)
The Spider's Stratagem (Strategia del ragno), directed by Bernardo Bertolucci - (Italy)
Spring and Port Wine, starring James Mason and Susan George - (U.K.)
Start the Revolution Without Me, directed by Bud Yorkin, starring Gene Wilder, Donald Sutherland, Hugh Griffith
Strange Holiday
The Strawberry Statement, starring Bruce Davison, Kim Darby, Bud Cort
Street Scenes, directed by Martin Scorsese (documentary)
Strogoff
Sunflower (I girasoli), directed by Vittorio De Sica, starring Marcello Mastroianni and Sophia Loren - (Italy)
Suppose They Gave a War and Nobody Came, starring Brian Keith, Don Ameche, Tony Curtis, Suzanne Pleshette
A Swedish Love Story (En kärlekshistoria) - (Sweden)
T
Taking Tiger Mountain by Strategy (Zhi qu wei hu shan) - (China)
Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon, directed by Otto Preminger, starring Liza Minnelli
There's a Girl in My Soup, starring Peter Sellers and Goldie Hawn - (U.K.)
There Was a Crooked Man..., starring Kirk Douglas and Henry Fonda
They Call Me Trinity (Lo chiamavano Trinità), starring Terence Hill and Bud Spencer - (Italy)
The Things of Life (Les choses de la vie) - (France)
Three Sisters, by Laurence Olivier, starring Joan Plowright and Olivier - (U.K.)
...tick...tick...tick..., starring Jim Brown and George Kennedy
Too Late the Hero, directed by Robert Aldrich, starring Michael Caine, Cliff Robertson, Henry Fonda - (U.K./U.S.A.)
Tora! Tora! Tora!, co-directed by Richard Fleischer and Kinji Fukasaku, starring Martin Balsam and Takahiro Tamura - (U.S./Japan)
The Traveling Executioner, starring Stacy Keach, Bud Cort
Tristana, directed by Luis Buñuel, starring Catherine Deneuve, Fernando Rey, Franco Nero - (Spain/France/Italy)
The Twelve Chairs, directed by Mel Brooks, starring Frank Langella, Ron Moody, Dom DeLuise
Two Mules for Sister Sara, directed by Don Siegel, starring Shirley MacLaine and Clint Eastwood
U
Ucho (The Ear) - (Czechoslovakia)
La última aventura del Zorro
Up in the Cellar, starring Joan Collins and Larry Hagman
V
Valerie and Her Week of Wonders (Valerie a týden divů) - (Czechoslovakia)
The Vampire Lovers, starring Peter Cushing - (U.K.)
Vengeance (Bao chou) - (Hong Kong)
W
A Walk in the Spring Rain, starring Anthony Quinn and Ingrid Bergman
The Wandering Swordsman (You xia er), directed by Chang Cheh - (Hong Kong)
Waterloo, directed by Sergei Bondarchuk, starring Rod Steiger, Christopher Plummer, Orson Welles - (U.S.S.R./Italy)
Weekend With the Babysitter starring George E Carey and Susan Romen
Where's Poppa?, directed by Carl Reiner, starring George Segal, Ruth Gordon, Ron Leibman
Which Way to the Front?, directed by and starring Jerry Lewis
White Sun of the Desert (Beloye solntse pustyni) - (USSR)
Whale (Kit), directed by Petar B. Vasilev, starring Georgi Kaloyanchev, Dimitar Panov, Georgi Partsalev - (Bulgaria)
The Window - starring Behrouz Vossoughi and Googoosh - Iran
Why Does Herr R. Run Amok? (Warum läuft Herr R. Amok?), directed by Rainer Werner Fassbinder - (West Germany)
The Wild Child (L'Enfant sauvage), directed by François Truffaut - (France)
Wood Pigeon (Toghi) - directed by Ali Hatami (Iran)
Woodstock, a musical documentary featuring Jimi Hendrix, The Who, Janis Joplin, Santana, Jefferson Airplane and others
WUSA, starring Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward
Z
Zabriskie Point, directed by Michelangelo Antonioni
Zig Zag, starring George Kennedy, Eli Wallach, Anne Jackson
January 1970
Scream and Scream Again
9 January
...tick...tick...tick...
14 January
Last of the Mobile Hot Shots
21 January
The Only Game in Town
25 January
MASH
28 January
The Molly Maguires
February 1970
1 February
The Kremlin Letter
9 February
Zabriskie Point
11 February
King of the Grizzlies
March 1970
4 March
Loving
5 March
Airport
6 March
Skullduggery
18 March
The Liberation of L.B. Jones
21 March
Gamera vs. Jiger (Japan)
31 March
Waterloo
April 1970
2 April
Patton
7 April
I Love My Wife
8 April
Colossus: The Forbin Project
The Cockeyed Cowboys of Calico County
9 April
Halls of Anger
28 April
A Man Called Horse
May 1970
1 May
Taste the Blood of Dracula
13 May
My Lover, My Son
Getting Straight
20 May
The Landlord
26 May
The Magic Garden of Stanley Sweetheart
Beneath the Planet of the Apes
Pufnstuf
27 May
Watermelon Man
Zig Zag
June 1970
1 June
The Boatniks
3 June
The Executioner
10 June
The Invincible Six
15 June
The Strawberry Statement
16 June
Two Mules for Sister Sara
17 June
Beyond the Valley of the Dolls
A Walk in the Spring Rain
The Hawaiians
23 June
Kelly's Heroes
24 June
Myra Breckinridge
July 1970
9 July
The Games
12 July
Hello-Goodbye
Soldier Blue
15 July
Joe
The Revolutionary
16 July
R. P. M.
31 July
Move
August 1970
10 August
Diary of a Mad Housewife
12 August
Lovers and Other Strangers
September 1970
9 September
House of Dark Shadows
12 September
Five Easy Pieces
23 September
Tora! Tora! Tora!
October 1970
1 October
Cover Me Babe
The Great White Hope
How Do I Love Thee?
21 October
Little Fauss and Big Halsy
23 October
No Blade of Grass
24 October
Trog
November 1970
5 November
Scrooge
7 November
The Phantom Tollbooth
8 November
Scars of Dracula
9 November
Ryan's Daughter
December 1970
8 December
Husbands
The Horror of Frankenstein
11 December
The Aristocats
12 October
The Mind of Mr. Soames
15 December
The Wild Country
16 December
Puzzle of a Downfall Child
Love Story
17 December
Rio Lobo
18 December
I Walk the Line
31 December
Sometimes A Great Notion
The Ant and the Aardvark (1969–71)
Roland and Rattfink (1968–71)
Tijuana Toads (1969–72)
Woody Woodpecker (1941–49, 1951–72)
Chilly Willy (1955–72)
The Beary Family (1962–72)
January 29 - Heather Graham, American actress
February 14 - Simon Pegg, English actor
March 7 - Rachel Weisz, English actress
March 18 - Queen Latifah, American actress, rapper
March 20 - Linda Larkin, American cinema and television actress
March 28 - Vince Vaughn, American actor
April 20 - Shemar Moore, American actor
April 25 - Jason Lee, American actor, comedian and professional skateborder
April 29 - Uma Thurman, American actress
May 4 - Will Arnett, Canadian actor
May 9 - Helen Hill, American animator
May 12 - Samantha Mathis, American actress
May 18 - Tina Fey - American comedian
May 22 - Naomi Campbell, English model, actress
May 26 - John Hamburg, American writer and director
May 27 - Joseph Fiennes, English actor
May 28 - Glenn Quinn, Irish actor (d. 2002)
June 26 - Chris O'Donnell, American actor
July 14 - Mike McFarland, American voice actor
July 16 - Apichatpong Weerasethakul, Thai film director
July 30 - Christopher Nolan, English-American film director, producer, writer
August 5 - James Gunn, American film director, producer, writer
August 6 - M. Night Shyamalan, Indian-American film director, writer, producer, actor
August 15 - Maddie Corman, American actress
August 18 - Malcolm-Jamal Warner, actor
August 23
Jay Mohr, American actor, comedian
River Phoenix, American actor (died 1993)
August 24 - Jonathan Ward, American actor
September 29 - Emily Lloyd, English actress
September 30 - Tony Hale, American actor
October 2 - Kelly Ripa, American actress, television host
October 8 - Matt Damon, American actor
October 12 - Kirk Cameron, American actor
October 24 - Raul Esparza, American actor
November 6 - Ethan Hawke, American actor
December 12 - Jennifer Connelly, American actress
December 17 - Sean Patrick Thomas, American actor
January 23 - Nell Shipman, 77, Canadian actress, writer, producer, The Girl from God's Country
January 25 - Eiji Tsuburaya, 68, Japanese film director and special effects designer, Godzilla, Godzilla, King of the Monsters!
January 27 - Rocco D'Assunta, 65, Italian actor, comedian and playwright
February 6 - Roscoe Karns, 76, American actor, It Happened One Night, Alibi Ike
February 19 - Jules Munshin, 54, American actor, On the Town, Take Me Out to the Ball Game
February 24 - Conrad Nagel, 72, American actor, All That Heaven Allows, The Divorcee
March 6 - William Hopper, 55, American actor, Rebel without a Cause, Track of the Cat
March 23 - Del Lord, 75, Canadian pioneer Hollywood director, A Plumbing We Will Go, All the World's a Stooge
April 11 - Cathy O'Donnell, 46, American actress, Ben-Hur, The Best Years of Our Lives
April 25 - Anita Louise, 55, American actress, The Little Princess, The Story of Louis Pasteur
April 26 - Gypsy Rose Lee, 59, American burlesque performer, actress, author, Screaming Mimi, Belle of the Yukon
April 28 - Ed Begley, 69, American actor, 12 Angry Men, Hang 'Em High
April 30 - Inger Stevens, 35, Swedish actress, Hang 'Em High, A Guide for the Married Man
May 10 - Mari Blanchard, 43, American actress, Destry, She-Devil
May 14 - Billie Burke, 85, American actress, The Wizard of Oz, Father's Little Dividend
June 4 - Sonny Tufts, 58, American actor, The Virginian, Government Girl
July 6 - Marjorie Rambeau, 80, American actress, A Man Called Peter, Tobacco Road
July 9 - Sigrid Holmquist, 71, Swedish actress, Just Around the Corner, Meddling Women
July 14 - Preston Foster, 69, American actor, The Informer, I Am a Fugitive from a Chain Gang
July 22 - Fritz Kortner, 78, German director, Pandora's Box, The Razor's Edge
July 24 - Frank Silvera, 55, Jamaican actor, Viva Zapata!, Hombre
August 1 - Frances Farmer, 56, American actress, Come and Get It, The Toast of New York
September 3 - Vasil Gendov, 78, Bulgarian film director, actor and acreenwriter, Bulgaran is Gallant
September 11 - Chester Morris, 69, American actor, Meet Boston Blackie, Five Came Back
September 18 - Jimi Hendrix, 27, American musician, Almost Famous, Wayne's World
September 29 - Edward Everett Horton, 84, American actor, Arsenic and Old Lace, Top Hat
October 4 - Janis Joplin, 27, American singer, Watchmen, Three Kings
October 10 - Grethe Weiser, 67, German actress
December 12 - George Terwilliger, 88, American director and screenwriter, The Fatal Hour, Bride's Play
October 17 - Vola Vale, 73, American actress, The Phantom of the Opera
December 23 - Charles Ruggles, 84, American actor, Bringing Up Baby, The Parent Trap
December 30 - Lenore Ulric, 78, American actress, Notorious, Camille
Linda Blair - The Way We Live Now
Danny DeVito - Dreams of Glass
Robert Downey, Jr. - Pound
Shelley Duvall - Brewster McCloud
Jeffrey Jones - The Revolutionary
Tommy Lee Jones - Love Story
Diane Keaton - Lovers and Other Strangers
Frank Langella - Diary of a Mad Housewife
Anne Meara - The Out-of-Towners
Stephen Rea - Cry of the Banshee
Susan Sarandon - Joe
Tom Selleck - Myra Breckinridge
Sissy Spacek - Trash
Paul Sorvino - Where's Poppa?
Sylvester Stallone - The Party at Kitty and Stud's
Ornella Muti - The Most Beautiful Wife
