Year 735 (DCCXXXV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 735 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Charles Martel, Merovingian mayor of the palace, invades Burgundy. Duke Hunald of Aquitaine refuses to recognise the authority of the Franks, whereupon Charles marches south of the River Loire, seizing the cities of Bordeaux and Blaye. Within 4 years he will have subdued all the Burgundian chieftains while continuing to fight off Moorish advances into Gaul.
King Liutprand of the Lombards raises his nephew Hildeprand to co-kingship after a serious illness (approximate date).
During the Tang Dynasty in China, by this year there is 149,685,400 kg (165,000 short tons) of grain shipped annually along the Grand Canal.
A smallpox epidemic starts in Japan, which reduces the population by 30%.
The Khöshöö Tsaidam Monuments of Bilge Khan, ruler (khagan) of the Turkic Khaganate, and his brother Kul Tigin are erected. (Bilge's has already erected Kül Tigin's monument and Bilge's son erects Bilge's monument.)
May 26 – Bede, Anglo-Saxon monk-historian, dies at Monkwearmouth–Jarrow Abbey. He will be remembered as "the Venerable", and is the author of books that are copied and studied later all over Europe. His greatest book is the Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum, a major source for the history of Britain in the immediate post-Roman period.
The see of York receives the pallium from pope Gregory III and is elevated to archbishopric. Ecgbert becomes the first archbishop.
Abu Yusuf, Muslim jurist and chief adviser (or 738)
Alcuin, Anglo-Saxon missionary (approximate date)
Du You, chancellor of the Tang Dynasty (d. 812)
Kardam, ruler (khan) of the Bulgarian Empire
Abi Ishaq, Arab grammarian
Adela, Frankish abbess (approximate date)
May 26 – Bede, Anglo-Saxon theologian and historian
Cathal mac Muiredaig, king of Connacht (Ireland)
Cellach mac Fáelchair, king of Osraige (Ireland)
Eudes, duke of Aquitaine (approximate date)
December 6 – Toneri, Japanese prince (b. 676)
