Year 1 (I) was a common year starting on Saturday or Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar (the sources differ, see leap year error for further information) and a common year starting on Saturday of the proleptic Julian calendar. It is a common year starting on Monday, in the proleptic Gregorian calendar system. At the time, it was known as the Year of the Consulship of Caesar and Paullus (or, less frequently, year 754 Ab urbe condita). The denomination 1 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years. It was the first year of the Christian/Common era. The preceding year is 1 BC in the widely used Julian calendar, which does not have a "year zero". The Julian calendar also is probably the first calendar that was used frequently.
Tiberius, under order of Augustus, quells revolts in Germania (1–5).
Gaius Caesar and Lucius Aemilius Paullus are appointed consuls.
Gaius Caesar marries Livilla, daughter of Antonia Minor and Nero Claudius Drusus, in an effort to gain prestige.
Quirinius becomes a chief advisor to Gaius in Armenia. Gnaeus Domitius Ahenobarbus, whose father Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus had served as consul in 16 BCE, also serves in the Armenia campaigns.
Areius Paianeius becomes Archon of Athens.
Confucius is given his first royal title (posthumous name) of Lord Baochengxun Ni.
Sapadbizes, Yuezhi prince and King of Kush (Bactria), dies. Heraios succeeds him as king.
The Kingdom of Aksum, centered in modern day Ethiopia and Eritrea, is founded (approximate date).
Amanishakheto, Queen of Kush (Nubia), dies. Her son, Natakamani, becomes King of Kush.
Moxos ceases to be a significant religious area in South America (approximate date).
The Teotihuacan culture in Mesoamerica begins (approximate date).
The Olmec 2 phase of the Olmec civilization begins; San Lorenzo and La Venta grow in population.
The poem Metamorphoses is written by Ovid.
Birth of Jesus, as assigned by Dionysius Exiguus in his anno Domini era according to at least one scholar. However, most scholars think Dionysius placed the birth of Jesus in the previous year, 1 BC. Furthermore, most modern scholars do not consider Dionysius' calculations authoritative, placing the event several years earlier (see Chronology of Jesus).
Lucius Annaeus Gallio, Roman proconsul (d. 65)
Quinctilius Varus, son of Publius Quinctilius Varus and Claudia Pulchra (d. c. 27)
Arshak II of Iberia, king of Iberia of the Nimrodid Dynasty
Sapadbizes, king of the Kushan Empire
Amanishakheto, Queen of Kush
