ขจ
น
Year 759 (DCCLIX) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 759 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Battle of the Rishki Pass: Emperor Constantine V invades Thrace again, but his forces are ambushed and defeated while crossing the Rishki Pass, near Stara Planina (modern Bulgaria). In response Vinekh, ruler (khagan) of the Bulgarian Empire, did not exploit his success and starts peace negotiations.
Siege of Narbonne: The Franks under king Pepin III ("the Short") retake Narbonne from the Muslims after a 7-year siege. He pushes them back across the Pyrenees and the Muslims retreat to the Andalusian heartland after 40 years of occupation. The government of the city is assigned to the Visigothic count Miló.
July 24 – King Oswulf of Northumbria is murdered by members of his own household (his servants or bodyguards), at Market Weighton. The Deiran patrician, Æthelwald Moll, who probably conspired in the regicide, is crowned king of Norhumbria. He may have been a descendant of the late king Oswine of Deira.
Exceptional winter in England. Frost begins October 1 and ends February 26 760.
Caliph Al-Mansur of the Abbasid Caliphate launches the conquest of Tabaristan (on the southern coast of the Caspian Sea). Its ruler, Khurshid II, flees into the mountains to the fortress city of Daylam.
An Lushan Rebellion: Tang forces under Guo Ziyi lay siege to the city of Yanjing (Northern China) as they increase their efforts to end the rebellion. The fightings create such a shortage of food within its walls that rats sell at enormous prices.
Otomo no Yakamochi, Japanese general, compiles the first Japanese poetry anthology, Man'yōshū. It contains some 500 poems by Japanese poets who include the emperor, nobleman and commoners.
December 24 – Tang Dynasty poet Du Fu departs for Chengdu, where he is hosted by fellow poet Pei Di.
Bregwin is appointed archbishop of Canterbury (approximate date).
The Tōshōdai-ji Buddhist Temple is founded in Nara, Japan.
Alfonso II, king of Asturias (d. 842)
Asad ibn al-Furat, Muslim jurist and theologian (d. 828)
Quan Deyu, chancellor of the Tang Dynasty (d. 818)
Theodore the Studite, Byzantine abbot (d. 826)
Wang Shizhen, general of the Tang Dynasty (d. 809)
Edburga, Anglo-Saxon abbess
Dúngal mac Amalgado, king of Brega (Ireland)
July 24 – Oswulf, king of Northumbria
Othmar, Swiss abbot (approximate date)
Wang Wei, Chinese poet (b. 699)
