Year 1205 (MCCV) was a common year starting on Saturday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
The general Muhammad al_Inti b. Abi Hafs establishes the Almohad domination over the eastern parts of Ifriqiya and enters in Tripoli.
Theodore I Laskaris is proclaimed Byzantine Emperor, formally founding the Empire of Nicaea, after repelling the invasions of rivals David Komnenos and Manuel Maurozomes into his domains.
January 6 – Philip of Swabia becomes King of the Romans.
April 14 – The Bulgarians defeat the Latins in the Battle of Adrianople.
Anjou is conquered by Philip II of France. Fearing a French invasion of England itself, John of England requires every English male over 12 to enter an association "for the general defence of the realm and the preservation of peace".
Othon de la Roche founds the Duchy of Athens.
William of Wrotham, Lord Warden of the Stannaries of England, oversees a reform of English currency. In keeping with other high-ranking bureaucrats of his time and place, this is just one of Wrotham's many offices: he is also Keeper of the King's Ports & Galleys, supervisor of the mints of Canterbury and London, ward of the vacant Diocese of Bath and Wells, an archdeacon of Taunton, a canon of Wells, and will serve the following year as a circuit judge.
July 15 – Pope lays down the principle that Jews are doomed to perpetual servitude because they had crucified Jesus.
January 26 - Emperor Lizong of Song (died 1264)
July 10 - Hōjō Masamura, Japanese shogun (died 1273)
August - Razia Sultana,a woman ruler of New Delhi(d.1240)
April 1 – King Amalric II of Jerusalem (b. 1145)
April 5 – Queen Isabella I of Jerusalem (b. 1172)
May 7 – Ladislaus III of Hungary (b. 1201)
June 14 – Walter III of Brienne
June 21 – Enrico Dandolo, Doge of Venice (b. c. 1107)
July 13 – Hubert Walter, Archbishop of Canterbury
& June – Alexios Aspietes, ruler of Philippopolis
December – Alexios V Doukas, Byzantine Emperor (executed)
date unknown – Žvelgaitis, Lithuanian duke
probable – Baldwin I of Constantinople (b. 1172)
