Year 747 (DCCXLVII) was a common year starting on Sunday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 747 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
Arab–Byzantine War: Emperor Constantine V destroys the Arab fleet off Cyprus with aid by ships from the Italian city-states, breaking the naval power of the Umayyad Caliphate.
August 15 – Carloman, mayor of the palace of Austrasia, renounces his position as majordomo and withdraws from public life. He retires to a monastery near Rome, being tonsured by pope Zachary, and leaves his brother Pepin the Short as sole ruler (de facto) of the Frankish Kingdom.
Bubonic plague breaks out in Sicily, Calabria (Southern Italy), and Monemvasia (modern Greece).
June 9 – Abbasid Revolution: Abu Muslim Khorasani, Arab military leader, begins an open revolt against Umayyad rule, which is carried out under the sign of the Black Standard. Close to 10,000 Muslim Arabs are under his command when the hostilities officially begin in Merv (modern Turkmenistan).
Chinese forces under Gao Xianzhi (a Korean in Tang employ) defeat the Arabs and Tibetans by rapid military expeditions over the Pamir Mountains and Hindu Kush. About 72 local Indian and Sogdian kingdoms become Tang vassals. Over the next two years he establishes complete control in East Asia.
Emperor Xuan Zong abolishes the death penalty in China during the Tang Dynasty (approximate date).
Empress Kōmyō founds the Shin-Yakushi-ji Buddhist temple in Nara (Japan).
Benedict of Aniane, Frankish monk (approximate date)
Charlemagne, king and emperor of the Franks (or 748)
Cú Chuimne, Irish monk
Dunn, bishop of Rochester
Fiachna ua Maicniadh, Irish abbot
Li Shizhi, chancellor and poet of the Tang Dynasty
Petronax, Italian monk and abbot (approximate date)
Sulayman ibn Hisham, Arab general
Wigbert, Anglo-Saxon monk
Witta of Büraburg, Anglo-Saxon missionary
747 is one of the abbreviations of the Boeing 747.
