Year 548 (DXLVIII) was a leap year starting on Wednesday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar. The denomination 548 for this year has been used since the early medieval period, when the Anno Domini calendar era became the prevalent method in Europe for naming years.
June 28 – Empress Theodora I, age 48, dies probably of breast cancer (according to bishop Victor of Tunnuna). Her body is buried in the Church of the Holy Apostles (Constantinople).
Emperor Justinian I relieves Belisarius from military service in favour of the 70-year-old Byzantine general Narses.
Theudigisel, Visigothic general, proclaims himself ruler over the Visigothic Kingdom after king Theudis is murdered.
Lazic War: King Gubazes II revolts against the Persians and requests for aid from Justinian I. He sends a Byzantine expeditionary force (8,000 men) to Lazica (modern Georgia).
Gubazes II besieges the fortress of Petra, located on the Black Sea. The Persian army under Mermeroes defeat a small Byzantine force guarding the mountain passes and relieve Petra.
Mermeroes stations a garrison of 3,000 men in the stronghold of Petra and marched to Armenia. The Persians lack of sufficient supplies, securing the supply routes and plunder Lazica.
Spring – Battle of the Fields of Cato: The Byzantine army under John Troglita crush the Moorish revolt in Byzacena (Tunisia).
April 13 – Emperor Lý Nam Đế of Vietnam is killed by Laotian tribesmen while on retreat from the Hong River Plain. He is succeeded by his elder brother Lý Thiên Bảo.
Cosmas Indicopleustes, Alexandrian merchant, writes his work Christian Topography. He describes the importance of the spice trade (especially in cloves and sweet aloes) in Ceylon and the harvesting of pepper in India (approximate date).
Saint Catherine's Monastery established in the Sinai Peninsula.
Xiao Zhuang, crown prince of the Southern Dynasties (approximate date)
Carcasan, king of the Ifuraces (Algeria)
Chen Daoten, father of Xuan Di (or 549)
April 13 – Lý Nam Đế, emperor of Vietnam
Theudebert I, king of Austrasia (or 547)
June 28 – Theodora I, Byzantine Empress
Theudis, king of the Visigoths
