Year 1358 (MCCCLVIII) was a common year starting on Monday (link will display the full calendar) of the Julian calendar.
March 16 – King Haakon VI of Norway designates the city of Skien as a city with trading privileges, making it the 6th town with city status in the Norway.
May 28 – The Jacquerie: A peasant rebellion begins in France during the Hundred Years' War, which consumes the Beauvais and allies with Étienne Marcel's seizure of Paris.
June 27 – The Republic of Ragusa is founded.
July 10 – Battle of Mello: The Jacquerie rebellion is defeated by a coalition of nobles, led by Charles II of Navarre.
Estimation: Nanjing in Mongolian China becomes the largest city of the world, taking the lead from Hangzhou in Mongolian China.
Mubarazuddin Muhammad, leader of the Arab Muzaffarid tribe, expels the Blue Horde from Ilkhanate territory in Persia. The Muzaffarid then release control of the Il-Khanate after being marched on by the Mongol Jalayirid tribe ruled by Shaikh Uvais. Shaikh Uvais becomes the new Il-Khan. The Ilkhanate is effectively now disbanded and replaced by the Jalayirid dynasty of Persia.
Shah Shuja overthrows his father, Mubarazuddin Muhammad, as leader of the Muzaffarid tribe.
Mohammed Shah I becomes Bahmani Sultan of Deccan (now part of southern India) after the death of Sultan Ala-ud-Din Bahman Shah.
Muhammad II as Said becomes ruler of the Marinid dynasty in present-day Morocco after the assassination of Abu Inan Faris.
January 20 – Eleanor of Aragon, queen of John I of Castile (d. 1382)
August 24 – King John I of Castile (d. 1390)
September 25 – Ashikaga Yoshimitsu, Japanese shogun (d. 1408)
January 6 – Gertrude van der Oosten, beguine
June 7 – Ashikaga Takauji, Japanese shogun (b. 1305)
July 10 – Guillaume Caillet, French peasant revolutionary (executed)
July 31 – Étienne Marcel, Provost of the merchants of Paris
August 16 – Albert II, Duke of Austria (b. 1298)
August 22 – Isabella of France, queen of Edward II of England (b. 1295)
November – Gregory of Rimini, philosopher
date unknown
Jean Buridan, French philosopher (b. 1300)
Brian MacCathmhaoil, Irish, Bishop of the Diocese of Clogher
Hasan Gangu, first Bahmani Sultan of Deccan
Abu Inan Faris, ruler of the Marinid dynasty in Morocco (assassinated)
