International Mother Language Day (IMLD) (Bengali: আন্তর্জাতিক মাতৃভাষা দিবস Antôrjatik Matribhasha Dibôs) is a worldwide annual observance held on 21 February to promote awareness of linguistic and cultural diversity and multilingualism. First announced by UNESCO on 17 November 1999, it was formally recognized by the United Nations General Assembly in its resolution establishing 2008 as the International Year of Languages.
International Mother Language Day has been being observed since 2000 to promote peace and multilingualism. The date corresponds to the day in 1952 when students from the University of Dhaka, Jagannath University and Dhaka Medical College, demonstrating for the recognition of Bengali as one of the two national languages of East Pakistan, were shot dead by police near the Dhaka High Court in the capital of present-day Bangladesh.
"Mother language" is the calque of a term used in several Romance languages — lengua materna (Spanish), lingua madre (Italian) and langue maternelle (French) — as well as the Sanskrit matribhasha and Tamil "thaimozhi". The more literal and more common English translation is "mother tongue", while "native language" has the same meaning and is also in common use. In linguistics, the English term "mother language" usually refers to an ancestral language, often a proto-language, relative to its descendent language family.
International Mother Language Day was proclaimed by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) in November 1999 (30C/62). On 16 May 2009 the United Nations General Assembly, in its resolution A/RES/61/266, called on its member states "to promote the preservation and protection of all languages used by people of the world". In the resolution, the General Assembly proclaimed 2008 as the International Year of Languages to promote unity in diversity and international understanding through multilingualism and multiculturalism. The resolution was suggested by Rafiqul Islam,a Bengali living in Vancouver, Canada. He wrote a letter to Mr. Kofi Anan on 9 January 1998 asking him to take a step for saving all the languages of the world from the possibility of extinction and to declare an International Mother Language Day. Rafiq proposed the date as 21 February on the pretext of 1952 killing in Dhaka on the occasion of Language Movement.
Languages are the most powerful instruments of preserving and developing our tangible and intangible heritage. All moves to promote the dissemination of mother tongues will serve not only to encourage linguistic diversity and multilingual education but also to develop fuller awareness of linguistic and cultural traditions throughout the world and to inspire solidarity based on understanding, tolerance and dialogue.
1952: The foundation for the day.
1999: UNESCO proclaimed 21 February (Ekushey February) as the International Mother Language Day
2000: Inaugural celebration of the International Mother Language Day
2001: Second annual celebration
2002: Linguistic-diversity theme, with 3,000 endangered languages (slogan: In the galaxy of languages, every word is a star.)
2003: Fourth annual celebration
2004: Children-learning theme; the UNESCO observance included "a unique exhibition of children’s exercise books from around the world illustrating the process by which children learn and master the use of written literacy skills in the classroom".
2005: Braille and sign languages
2006: Languages and cyberspace
2007: Multilingual education
2008: International Year of Languages
2009: Tenth annual celebration
2010: International Year for the Rapprochement of Cultures
2011: Information and communication technologies
2012: Mother tongue instruction and inclusive education
2013: Books for mother tongue education
2014: Local languages for Global Citizenship: Spotlight on Science
2015: Inclusion in and through education: language counts (with an event in Paris)
2016: Quality education, language(s) of instruction and learning outcomes
UNESCO chooses a theme for each International Mother Language Day, and sponsors related events at its Paris headquarters on or around 21 February each year. In 2008, the International Year of Languages formally began on International Mother Language Day.
People have shaped the way of celebrating International Mother Language Day. The celebration of the day among with the topic of multilingual diversity has inspired a number of international, national and provincial award ceremonies.
In respect of the language martyrs (see Language Movement Day) — the lion-hearted students Rafiq, Jabbar, Salam, Borkot and so on who died during a protest at the University of Dhaka on February 21, 1952 — the people in Bangladesh celebrate International Mother Language Day by laying down flowers to the Martyr's Monument (Shaheed Minar) and replications of that monument.
The people organize social gatherings, where they honor their language and culture, and hold literary competitions, draw Alpana on the roads, eat festive meals and listen to event themed songs, e.g. the "Amar Bhaiyer Rakte Rangano" (translated: "Coloured in the blood of my brother").
International Mother Language Day is celebrated all over the world in countries like e.g. Chile, Russia, Philippines, Egypt and in Canada.
The Government of India has decided to promote and digitize content in all its 22 officially recognized languages. As a part of Prime Minister Narendra Modi's Digital India initiative, digitized content will be made available in 22 scheduled languages which will be extended to other 234 recognized languages of India.
International Mother Language Day has inspired multiple organizations to recognize individual people for outstanding services to the community, and for the preservation of linguistic diversity and connected topics. In Alberta BHESA's Ekushey Heritage Awards and MJMF's Ekushey Youth Awards were announced and distributed by Delwar Jahid, the President of the Bangladesh PressClub Centre of Alberta in separate occasions.
The International Linguapax Award is awarded annually on 21 February on International Mother Language Day by Linguapax International in Barcelona, Spain. It aims to recognize and award the actions carried out in different areas in favour of the preservation of linguistic diversity, revitalization and reactivation of linguistic communities and the promotion of multilingualism.
The Ekushey Heritage Award is an appreciation for people who stand out exceptionally in helping their community. It was introduced in 2014 by the Bangladesh Heritage and Ethnic Society of Alberta (BHESA) located in Alberta, Canada and is awarded annually. Today the award is open for people residing in the Province of Alberta, and considered is the work of the recipients in fields like education, social work, and community services. The achievement may be awarded to multiple recipients and is officially announced on International Mother Language Day.
The Ekushey Youth Award has been introduced in February 2015 by the Mahinur Jahid Memorial Foundation (MJMF) and will be awarded annually to recipients, who stand out inspiring a young audience with their work and contributions in the fields of education, sports, youth activities, literature and community services here. The honour may be awarded multiple times and is open to residents of the Province of Alberta in Canada. The Ekushey Youth Award is announced on International Mother Language Day.
International Mother Language Day is a public holiday in Bangladesh since 1953, where it is also known as Shohid Dibôsh, or Shaheed Day. Though the day is observed globally but it is not a public holiday in other parts of the world. At 17 November 1999 the UNESCO General Conference officially recognized February 21 as International Mother Language Day.
International Mother Language Day has been introduced to the Canadian Parliament for recognition by Matthew Kellway on February 5, 2014. The introduction has been made in form of a Private Member's Bill, Bill C-573 (view Bill), the International Mother Language Day Act.
In 2015 two Canadian provinces, the Province of British Columbia and the Province of Manitoba have passed proclamations to officially observe International Mother Language Day on February 21.
Language festival
Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights
Official languages of the United Nations
