The Akademio de Esperanto (Esperanto pronunciation: [akadeˈmio de espeˈranto]), known in English as the Academy of Esperanto, is an independent body of language scholars who steward the evolution of the language Esperanto by keeping it consistent with the fundamental principles thereof. Modelled somewhat after the Académie française, it was proposed by L. L. Zamenhof, creator of Esperanto, at the First World Congress of Esperanto, and founded soon after with the name Lingva Komitato (Language Committee). This Committee had a "superior commission" called "Akademio" ("Academy"). In 1948, within the framework of a general reorganization, the Language Committee and the Academy combined to form the Akademio de Esperanto.
The body consists of 45 members, and has a president, vice-presidents and a secretary. The corresponding address including e-mail is at the secretary. The finance is covered by a subsidy from the World Esperanto Association and by donations.
Members are elected by their peers for a period of nine years, elections being held every three years for a third of the members. Following the last elections in February 2016, the Akademio de Esperanto consists of the following:
Marc Bavant
Vilmos Benczik
Gerrit Berveling
Marek Blahuš
Marjorie Boulton
Cyril Brosch
Renato Corsetti (secretary)
Marcos Cramer
Probal Dasgupta (president)
Edmund Grimley-Evans
Paul Gubbins
Nikolao Gudskov
Boris Kolker
Katalin Kováts
Erich-Dieter Krause
Harri Laine
Jouko Lindstedt
Haitao Liu
François Lo Jacomo
Anna Löwenstein
Ma Young-tae
Carmel Mallia
Stano Marček
Alexander Melnikov
Carlo Minnaja
Paŭlo Moĵajev
Brian Moon (vice president)
Nguyễn Xuân Thu
Barbara Pietrzak
Sergej Pokrovskij
Otto Prytz (vice president)
Baldur Ragnarsson
Giridhar Rao
Orlando Raola
Tsvi Sadan
Saka Tadasi
Alexander Shlafer
Humphrey R. Tonkin
Usui Hiroyuki
Amri Wandel
John C. Wells
Bertilo Wennergren
Yamasaki Seikô
Former members have included Gaston Waringhien, Rüdiger Eichholz, Jorge Camacho, Victor Sadler, Michel Duc-Goninaz, and William Auld (president of the Academy 1979-1983).
List of language regulators
