Awadhi (Devanagari: अवधी) is an Indo-Aryan language spoken primarily in the Awadh region of Uttar Pradesh. Spoken by more than 35 million people, Awadhi is ranked 29th out of the most-spoken languages in the world.
Awadhi is overwhelmingly written in the Devanagari script; however, the Kaithi and Perso-Arabic scripts were historically and are sometimes employed by mercantile and Awadhi Muslim communities, respectively.
Awadhi has featured prominently in Indian popular culture and is widely regarded as of the most important literary languages of central India alongside Braj Bhasha. Furthermore, a seemingly coarse and contemporary variant of Awadhi, known as Dehati, has been made famous by its inclusion in Bollywood cinema.
Awadhi was classified as an Eastern Hindi by George Abraham Grierson, who commissioned the Linguistic Survey of India. It is a clearly-defined language in its own right, and distinct from the Standard Hindi frequently used in administration, education and government.
Like many other Indo-Aryan languages, Awadhi has often been subject to erroneous, arbitrary, or politically-motivated designation as a dialect, instead of a language. Furthermore, as is the case with other Hindi languages, Awadhi speakers have been conflated with those of Standard Hindi in censuses.
Awadhi has exerted significant lexical influence on neighbouring Hindi languages. It has also heavily influenced Fiji Hindi, the standardised lingua-franca employed by Indians in Fiji.
Awadhi is primarily spoken in the historically-significant Awadh region of Uttar Pradesh. Awadhi is also spoken in Uttarakhand and Bihar, the adjoining Madhesh region of Nepal, and the lower stretch of the Ganges–Yamuna Doab region. Awadhi speakers have also emigrated to cities across India, which, coupled with Awadhi's popularity in media and culture, has contributed to its widespread prominence throughout the country.
In Awadh, it is spoken in the following districts almost entirely:
Raebareli
Unnao
Faizabad
Sultanpur
Lucknow
Kanpur
Barabanki
Hardoi
Bahraich
Gonda
Sravasti
Balrampur
Siddharthnagar
Pratapgarh
Basti (excluding eastern areas)
Kanpur Urban
Fatehpur
Kaushambi
Allahabad
Lakhimpur Kheri (excluding western areas)
Sitapur (excluding western areas)
Ambedkar Nagar (excluding eastern areas)
In Nepal, it is spoken in the following regions:
Lumbini
Nawalparasi
Kapilvastu
Rupandehi
Rapti
Dang Deukhuri
Bheri
Banke
Bardiya
Nepalgunj is the main centre of Awadhi in Nepal.
Important works in Awadhi are the Candayan of Maulana Da’ud, the Padmavat of Malik Mohammad Jaisi (1540 A.D.), the Ramcharitmanas of Tulsidas (1575 A.D.), and Indravati by Nur Muhammad (1757 A.D.). Furthermore, many, if not most of the famous literary works of northern India, including Chalisas such as Hanuman Chalisha, were composed in Awadhi.
Before 1990, the Awadhi language featured in most mainstream Indian films to varying degrees, such as Ganga Jumna. Awadhi also features in various Hindi movies like Lagaan, Peepli Live, Tumko Na Bhool Paayenge, Naya Daur, Haasil, Billu and PK. Awadhi also remains popular in relatively modern television serials like Ramayan.
Bollywood star Amitabh Bachhan has a noted propensity for switching to Awadhi in his many movies and songs like "Holi Khere Raghuvira Awadh Ma" from Baghban and "Ek Rahe Eer Ek Rahe Beer" from Bhootnath. Recently in the serial Yudh which aired on Sony Entertainment Television (India), Bachchan spoke parts of his dialogue in Awadhi which were received with critical acclaim. According to the Hindustan Times: "We simply loved Amitabh Bachchan speaking Awadhi on TV! Only an actor of his calibre could transform himself from a high-class English speaking businessman to rattle off the dialogues in Awadhi, his mother tongue. He has done it in the past for a few Bollywood and regional films, but not as regularly as one would have liked him, to show off grasp over the language. It was great to see him speak in fluent Awadhi in Wednesday's episode."
Note that the above sentences are in the standard context of a male talking to a male who is older or of the same age. Awadhi, like many other Indo-Aryan languages, maintains a T-v distinction according to the formality of the situation. Therefore, at other times, tumar tends to be tohaar and tor (for a younger person). While talking to someone, people often use the word falane or falana to refer to someone unnamed or unknown. For example, falana ke bappa hinya aye rahain means, in English: "his father has come here".
Kinship
Color
Name of days
Interrogatives
Some famous proverbs used in Awadhi:
माई के जियरा गाई कै, बेटवा के कसाई कै Maai ke jiyara gaai ke, betwa ke kasaai ke. "Mother's heart is a cow's heart, son's heart is a butcher's heart."
घ्यिऊ देत बाभन नरियाय Gheu det babhan nariyay. "Brahmin throws tantrums."
Bagheli
Languages of India
Languages with official status in India
List of Indian languages by total speakers
