Ivan is a Christian male given name that is primarily associated with Slavic languages. It is the most common Slavic variant of the name "John".
Ivan is the common Slavic Latin spelling, while Cyrillic spelling is two-fold: in Bulgarian, Russian, Macedonian, Serbian and Montenegrin it is Иван, while in Belarusian and Ukrainian it is Iван.
It is the Slavic relative of the Latin name Johannes, corresponding to English John. This Slavic version of the name originates from New Testament Greek Ἰωάννης (Iōánnēs) rather than from the Latin Io(h)annes. The Greek name is in turn derived from Hebrew יוֹחָנָן (Yôḥānān, meaning “‘Yahweh is gracious’”). The name is ultimately derived from the Biblical Hebrew name יוחנן (pronounced [joχanan]), short for יהוחנן (pronounced [jəhoχanan]), meaning "Yahweh is merciful". Common surnames derived from the name Ivan, are Ivanović commonly used in Montenegro and Serbia, and Ivanov, commonly used in Russia and Bulgaria. "Ivanovich" is a Russian patronymic/middle name meaning "son of Ivan/John" or "Ivanson/Johnson".
The name is common among Bulgarians, Montenegrins, Russians, Macedonians, Serbs, Croats, Belarusians, Ukrainians and to a smaller extent Czechs and Slovaks. Popular variations include Jovan and Joan.
Ivan is the most common male name in Bulgaria and Croatia. In Serbia, it was the 9th most common male name in the period of 1971–1980; 6th in 1981–1990; 9th in 1991–2000.
Since the 20th century, it has also been used as a popular given name among Italian (both the original form and the italianized version, Ivano), Spanish (as Iván), and Portuguese (sometimes Ivã) speaking peoples.
Its female forms are Ivana (Western and Southern Slavs) and Ivanna (Eastern Slavs). Ivanka is a variation on these names.
Ivan was also occasionally used by various parties during World War II as a general name for the Soviets.
Ivan was the name of several Bulgarian tsars:
Ivan Asen I
Kaloyan
Ivan Asen II
Ivan Alexander
Ivan Shishman
Ivan Stephen
Ivan Stratsimir
Ivan Vladislav
Other Bulgarians
Ivan Rilski (John of Rila), national saint and hermit
Ivan was the name of many Croatian bans:
Ivan Horvat - ban in years 1376 to 1381, and 1385–86, killer of Hungarian regent Elizabeth of Bosnia
Ivan od Paližne - ban in years 1385–86
Ivan Bot - ban in 1493
Ivan Mažuranić - ban from 1873 to 1880, and a famous poet
Ivan was the name of several Russian tsars throughout history:
Ivan I, "The Moneybag"
Ivan II, "The Fair"
Ivan III, "The Great"
Ivan IV, "The Terrible"
Ivan V
Ivan VI
Ivan was the name of numerous Ukrainian hetmans and other cossacks leaders
Ivan Pidkova - zaporizhian cossacks leader, moldavian hospodar in 1577–1578 years
Ivan Kuckovych - hetman in 1602–1603 years
Ivan Kosyj - hetman in 1603 year
Ivan Sulyma - hetman in 1633–1635 years
Ivan Petrazhac'kyj-Kulaha - hetman of registered cossacks in 1631–1632 years
Ivan Vyhovs'kyj - hetman of Zaporozhian Army in 1657–1659 years
Ivan Br'uchovec'kyj - hetman of Zaporozhian Army in 1663–1665 years
Ivan Samojlovych - hetman of Zaporozhian Army in 1672–1687 years
Ivan Mazepa - hetman of Zaporozhian Army of both sides of Dnipro in 1687–1709 years
Ivan Skoropads'kyj - hetman of Zaporozhian Army in 1709–1722 years
Ivan Velychko-Bosovs'kyj - kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1662 year
Ivan Sirko - the most famous cossacks' leader; kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1663—1664 and 1673–1680 years, wins in 65 fights, never defeated, is said to be kharakternyk (magician), was called by tartars and Turks as "urus shaitan" - the devil of Rus'-Ukraine; signed the Reply of the Zaporozhian Cossacks to Sultan Mehmed IV of the Ottoman Empire in 1676 year
Ivan Shcherbyna - kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1664 year
Ivan Zhdan - kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1666–1667 years
Ivan B'elkovs'kyj - hetman of Zaporozhian Army in 1668 year
Ivan St'ahajlo - kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1680–1681 years
Ivan Bilyc'kyj - kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1733, 1735, 1738, 1760, 1765 years
Ivan Malashevych - kosh's otaman of Zaporozhian Army in 1716-1720, 1734–1735 years
Saint Ivan (Bohemian, the Hermit) – legendary first Bohemian hermit from Svatý Jan pod Skalou
Iván Campo, Spanish footballer
Ivan Cleary, Australian Rugby League player and coach
Iván Córdoba, Colombian footballer
Iván Emmanuel González, Paraguayan footballer
Ivan Fedotov (born 1996), Russian ice hockey goaltender
Iván Helguera, Spanish footballer
Iván Hurtado, Ecuadorian footballer
Ivan Lendl, Czech-American tennis player
Ivan Ljubičić, Croatian tennis player
Ivan Miljković, Serbian volleyball player
Ivan Osier, Danish épée, foil, and sabre fencer, 25x Danish champion
Ivan Rakitić (born 1988), Croatian soccer player
Iván Rodríguez, Major League Baseball player
Ivan Sproule, Northern Irish footballer
Ivan Wilfred Johnson, Canadian hockey player
Iván Zamorano, Chilean footballer
Iván Zarandona, naturalized Equatoguinean footballer
Ivan Zaytsev (disambiguation), several sportsmen
George Ivan Morrison, Northern Irish singer-songwriter and musician
Ivan Brunetti, cartoonist
Ivan Bunin, Russian writer and Nobel laureate in literature
Ivan Della Mea, Italian singer-songwriter
Ivan Dixon, American actor, director and producer
Ivan Doroschuk, lead vocalist for Men Without Hats
Ivan Franko, Ukrainian writer
Ivan Graziani, Italian singer-songwriter
Ivan Jones, British Writer and poet
Ivan Kral, musician
Ivan Meštrović, Croatian sculptor and architect
Ivan L. Moody, singer of heavy metal band Five Finger Death Punch
Ivan Turgenev, Novelist in 19th century
Ivan Urgant, Russian television personality, presenter, actor and musician
Ivan Aboimov, Russian diplomat and an abassador
Ivan Agayants, Soviet intelligence officer of Armenian origin
Ivan Ahčin, Slovene sociologist, publicist, journalist, author and politician
Ivan Aksakov, Russian littérateur and notable Slavophile
Ivan Boesky, Wall Street trader, inspired the character of Gordon Gekko
Ivan Chermayeff, Graphic Designer
Ivan Corea, Sri Lankan Anglican priest
Ivan Gazidis, CEO of CTVglobemedia and the CTV Television Network
Ivan Gazidis, chief executive of the Arsenal Football Club
Ivan Glasenberg, CEO of Glencore, director of Xstrata and Minara Resources
Ivan Ilyin, Russian religious and political philosopher
Ivan Kaufman, President of Arbor Realty Trust
Ivan Massow, chairman of the Institute of Contemporary Arts
Ivan Menezes, CEO of Diageo, non-executive director at Coach, Inc.
Ivan Misner, chairman of BNI
Ivan Milat, Croatian Australian serial killer famous for the backpacker killings
Ivan Vsevolodovich Meshcherskiy, Russian mathematician
Ivan J. Parron, Entertainment attorney and entrepreneur
Ivan Pavlov, Nobel laureate in Medicine & Physiology
Ivan Reitman, Order of Canada, film producer and director, known for the Ghostbusters film series
Ivan Samoylovych, Hetman of Left-bank Ukraine
Ivan Seidenberg, Chairman & CEO at Verizon Communications
Ivan Selin, former Chairman of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Fulbright scholar
Ivan Tsybaev, Co-founder and CEO at Trucker Path
Ivan Warner (1919–1994), New York politician and judge
Ivan Wettengel, Naval Governor of Guam
Other notable people with the given name "Ivan".
Ivan Braginsky, the given name for the personification of Russia from the anime series "Hetalia: Axis Powers"
Ivan, a fictional secondary character of Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends
Ivan the Fool, a fictional character of Ivan the Fool (story)
Ivan Vanko, an antagonist from the Marvel Comics franchise The Invincible Iron Man and appears as the primary antagonist in the sequel to the film adaptation.
Ivan Denisovich Shukhov, a fictional character of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich
A character in Nintendo's Golden Sun
Ivan Vassilevich Lomov, a character in Anton Chekhov's one-act play, A Marriage Proposal
Ivan Raidenovich Raikov, a character who appears in Hideo Kojima's video game, Metal Gear Solid 3: Snake Eater'.
Ivan Ilych, the title character of Leo Tolstoy's book, The Death of Ivan Ilyich.
Ivan Karamazov, brother of protagonist Alyosha Karamazov, in Fyodor Dostoevsky's novel, The Brothers Karamazov
Ivan is the doorman in the 2006 film Curious George.
Ivan Veen is the main character of Vladimir Nabokov's Ada or Ardor.
Ivan Drago is the popular Soviet boxer and nemesis of Rocky Balboa in Rocky IV.
Ivan Nikolayevich Ponyryov (Bezdomny), a character in Mikhail Bulgakov's novel, The Master and Margarita
Ivan Shawbly, a fictional character from the television series Mona the Vampire
