Gheg (or Geg) (Albanian: Gegë) is one of the two major varieties of Albanian. The other is Tosk on which Standard Albanian is based. The geographic dividing line between the two varieties is the Shkumbin River, which winds its way through central Albania.
Gheg is spoken in Northern Albania, Kosovo, northwestern Republic of Macedonia, southeastern Montenegro and southern Serbia, by the ethnographic group known as Ghegs.
Gheg does not have any official status as a written language in any country. Publications in Kosovo and Macedonia are in Standard Albanian, which is based on Tosk. However, some authors continue to write in Gheg.
The Ghegs speak Gheg, one of the two main Albanian dialects. The Albanian communist regime based Standard Albanian mostly on Tosk. That practice has been criticized, notably by Arshi Pipa, who claimed that this decision deprived Albanian of its richness at the expense of the Ghegs, and he referred to the literary Albanian language as a "monstrosity" produced by the Tosk communist leadership that conquered anti-communist northern Albania militarily and imposed its Tosk Albanian dialect on the Ghegs.
Although Albanian writers in former Yugoslavia were almost all Ghegs, they chose to write in Tosk for political reasons. The change of literary language has significant political and cultural consequences because the Albanian language is the main criterion for self-identification of the Albanians.
Gheg has several dialects.
Southern Gheg is spoken in Albania (Durrës, Elbasan, Tiranë) and western Macedonia.
A subdialect is Central Gheg, spoken in Tiranë, Krujë and Burrel.
Middle Gheg (Peshkopi, Debar, Tetovo, Kičevo, Gostivar, Veles, Kruševo, Prilep)
Northeastern Gheg (Skopje, Kumanovo, Kačanik, Dragaš, Gjilan, Preševo, Bujanovac, Prishtina, Mitrovica, Podujevo, Medveđa and the formerly Albanian-populated territories of Niš Sanjak (Niš, Vranje, Toplica District)).
Northwestern Gheg (Shkodër, Vermosh, Selcë, Vukël, Lëpushë, Nikç, Tamarë, Tuzi, Ulcinj, Bar, Plav, Gusinje, Pejë, Gjakovë, Prizren)
The Italian linguist Carlo Tagliavini puts the Gheg of Kosovo and Macedonia in Eastern Gheg.
Assimilations are common in Gheg but are not part of the Albanian literary language, which is a standardized form of Tosk Albanian.
Albanian dialects
Arbëresh language
Arvanitika
Cham Albanian dialect
