Krems an der Donau [kʀɛms an dɐ ˈdoːnaʊ̯] is a town of 23,992 inhabitants in Austria, in the federal state of Lower Austria. It is the fifth-largest city of Lower Austria and is approximately 70 kilometres (43 miles) west of Vienna. Krems is a city with its own statute (or Statutarstadt), and therefore it is both a municipality and a district.
Krems is located at the confluence of the Krems and Danube Rivers at the eastern end of Wachau valley, in the southern Waldviertel.
Krems borders the following municipalities: Stratzing, Langenlois, Rohrendorf bei Krems, Gedersdorf, Traismauer, Nußdorf ob der Traisen, Paudorf, Furth bei Göttweig, Mautern an der Donau, Dürnstein, and Senftenberg.
Krems was first mentioned in 995 in a certificate of Otto III, but settlement was apparent even before then. For example, a child's grave, over 27,000 years old, was found here. This is the oldest grave found in Austria.
During the 11th and 12th centuries, Chremis, as it was then called, was almost as large as Vienna.
Krems is the primary producer of Marillenschnaps, an apricot brandy.
Krems is the hometown of Martin Johann Schmidt, called "Kremserschmidt", the leading painter, draughtsman and etcher of the Austrian late Baroque.
Innenstadt (Inner City)
Weinzierl
Mitterau
Stein
Egelsee
Rehberg
Am Steindl
Gneixendorf
Lerchenfeld
Krems-Süd (South Krems)
The population (with principal residence status) in the agglomeration was about 50,000 at the end of 2010.
Bürgerspitalkirche
Dominikanerkirche
Dreifaltigkeitssäule
Göglhaus
Gozzoburg
Großes Sgraffitohaus
Pfarrkirche St. Veit
Piaristenkirche
Pulverturm
Rathaus
Simandlbrunnen
Steiner Tor: The gate, erected in 1480, is the second remaining medieval gate
Frauenbergkirche
Göttweigerhofkapelle
Großer Passauerhof
Karikaturmuseum Krems
Kloster Und
Kremser Tor
Kunsthalle Krems
Linzer Tor
Mauthaus
Minoritenkirche
Pfarrkirche Hl. Nikolaus
Salzstadl
University Krems
The city's main railway station is a junction of the Franz-Josefs Railway to Vienna, the Kremser Railway to St. Pölten, the Donauufer Railway to Spitz and the regional railway to Horn. It is at the intersection of the Stockerauer Speedway S5 and the Kremser Speedway S33, and is traversed by the Danube Road B3, the Retzer Road B35, the Kremser Road B37 and the Langenloiser Road B218. Krems is a junction of the Wieselbus bus lines, which provides radial connections between Sankt Pölten and the different regions of Lower Austria.
Main Roads
Stockerauer Schnellstraße (S5) from Krems to Vienna
Kremser Schnellstraße (S33) from Krems to St. Pölten
Donau Straße (B3) from Krems to Linz
Aggsteiner Straße (B33) from Krems to Melk
Aggsteiner Straße (B33a) from Krems to Mautern an der Donau
Retzer Straße (B35) from Krems to Retz
Kremser Straße (B37) from Krems to Rastenfeld
Kremser Straße (B37a) from Krems to Traismauer
Langenloiser Straße (B218) from Krems to Langenlois
Railroad
Franz-Josefs-Bahn from Krems to Vienna
Kremser Bahn from Krems to St. Pölten
Donauuferbahn from Krems to Spitz
Kamptalbahn from Krems to Sigmundsherberg
Air traffic
Krems Airport
A network of four bus lines operates at regular intervals within the city. Every summer, a tourist train connects the ancient parts of the city with museums, the central railway station and the passenger ship terminal of Krems.
The municipal council consists of 40 members and since the municipal elections in 2012 it consists of the following parties:
16 Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPÖ) – the mayor and the first vice mayor
15 Austrian People's Party (ÖVP) – the second vice
3 Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ)
2 KLS
2 Austrian Green Party
2 UBK
0 GFK
Municipal elections in Krems were held in October 2012.
The city's senate consists of 10 members:
SPÖ: 5 members
ÖVP: 4 members
FPÖ: 1 members
BHAK/BHAS Krems
Bundesgymnasium Piaristen
Bundesgymnasium Rechte Kremszeile
Bundesreal- and Bundesoberstufenrealgymnasium (BORG) Krems Heinemannstraße
Bundesrealgymnasium Krems Ringstraße
Danube Private University
Danube University Krems
Folk high school
HLA/HLW Krems
HLF Krems
HTBL Krems
IMC Fachhochschule Krems (University of Applied Sciences)
Karl Landsteiner Privatuniversität für Gesundheitswissenschaften
Oberstufenrealgymnasium Englische Fräulein
School of education
Swimming is available at Kremser Strandbad (indoor swimming pool) and outdoor.
Football Club – Kremser SC
Ice Hockey – KEV Eagles
Miniature golf
Rugby Club Krems
Skatepark
Team handball – Union Handballklub Krems
Union Badminton Krems
Wilhelm Miklas, 3rd President of Austria
(Maria) Anna Liszt (née Lager)
Josef Maria Eder
Gregor Hradetzky
Ludwig Ritter von Köchel
Ulrike Lunacek
Peter B. Neubauer
Martin Johann Schmidt
Marko Stankovic
Krems is twinned with the following cities:
 Ribe, Denmark, since 1971
 Böblingen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany, since 1971
 Beaune, Côte-d'Or, Bourgogne-Franche-Comté, France, since 1973
 Passau, Bavaria, Germany, since 1974
 Kroměříž, Czech Republic, since 1994
 Grapevine, Texas, United States, since 1999
