Râșnov (Romanian pronunciation: [ˈrɨʃnov]; German: Rosenau; Hungarian: Barcarozsnyó; Transylvanian Saxon dialect: Rusnâ; Latin: Rosnovia) is a town in Brașov County, Romania with a population of under 16,000.
It is located at about 15 km from the city of Brașov and about the same distance from Bran, on the road that links Wallachia and Transylvania.
The castle of Râșnov was built in the years 1211-1225 by Teutonic Knights. Râșnov was mentioned for the first time in 1331 as Rosnou and again in 1388 as villa Rosarum. While the village was razed many times in its history by Tatars, Turks and Valachs, the castle was conquered only once, in 1612 by Gabriel Báthory.
In 1856, the Roman fort of Cumidava was discovered near the town.
In 2002, the Râșnov Citadel and surroundings were used during the shooting of several scenes from the American film Cold Mountain.
There is a myth attached to Râșnov Citadel. During a particularly long siege of the fortress, the citizens of Râşnov were concerned about the lack of available fresh drinking water. Two Turkish soldiers, having been captured earlier, were put to the task of digging a well in the centre of the fortress. These two men were assured that they would be given their freedom once the well was completed. According to local legend, it took them 17 years to finish the well, but they were still killed afterwards. This famous well still sits in the centre of Râșnov Fortress, and is 143 metres deep.
As of August 2013, Râșnov became the host of the first extreme metal festival in Romania, known as Rockstadt Extreme Fest which was held at the hill's base with the Râșnov Citadel. The festival featured bands such as Decapitated, Napalm Death, Gojira, Carach Angren, Septicflesh, Primordial among many others and it continues in 2014, Katatonia being the first band confirmed.
Râșnov Sports Complex was built just outside the town in Cărbunarii Valley, for 2013 European Youth Winter Olympic Festival which was hosted in the nearby city of Brașov.
Two ski jumping events will take place in Râșnov, as part of the Women's Ski Jumping World Cup 2013/2014 competition. The events are scheduled for March 2014, on the "Valea Cărbunării" slope.
List of castles in Romania
Tourism in Romania
Villages with fortified churches in Transylvania
