Carlisle Castle is situated in Carlisle, in the English county of Cumbria, near the ruins of Hadrian's Wall. The castle is over 900 years old and has been the scene of many historical episodes in British history. Given the proximity of Carlisle to the border between England and Scotland, it has been the centre of many wars and invasions. Today the castle is managed by English Heritage and is open to the public. The castle until recently was the administrative headquarters of the former King's Own Royal Border Regiment now county headquarters to the Duke of Lancaster's Regiment and a museum to the regiment is within the castle walls.
Carlisle Castle was first built during the reign of William II of England, the son of William the Conqueror who invaded England in 1066. At that time, Cumberland (the original name for north and west Cumbria) was still considered a part of Scotland. William II ordered the construction of a Norman style motte and bailey castle in Carlisle on the site of an old Roman fort, with construction beginning in 1093. The need for a castle in Carlisle was to keep the northern border of England secured against the threat of invasion from Scotland. In 1122, Henry I of England ordered a stone castle to be constructed on the site. Thus a keep and city walls were constructed. The existing Keep dates from somewhere between 1122 and 1135.
The act of driving out the Scots from Cumberland led to many attempts to retake the lands. The result of this was that Carlisle and its castle would change hands many times for the next 700 years. The first attempt began during the troubled reign of Stephen of England.
On the 26 March 1296, John 'The Red' Comyn, since the fourth quarter of 1295 Lord of Annandale, led a Scottish host across the Solway to attack Carlisle. The then governor of the castle, one Robert de Brus, deposed Lord of Annandale, successfully withstood the attack, before forcing the raiders to retreat back through Annandale to Sweetheart Abbey.
From the mid-13th century until the unification of England and Scotland in 1603, Carlisle castle was the vital headquarters of the Western March, a buffer zone to protect the western portion of the Anglo-Scottish border.
Henry VIII converted the castle for artillery, employing the engineer Stefan von Haschenperg. For a few months in 1567, Mary, Queen of Scots was imprisoned within the castle, in the Warden’s Tower, which was demolished in 1835. Later, the castle was besieged by the Parliamentary forces for eight months in 1644, during the English Civil War.
The most important battles for the city of Carlisle and its castle were during the second Jacobite rising against George II of Great Britain in 1745. The forces of Prince Charles Edward Stuart travelled south from Scotland into England reaching as far south as Derby. Carlisle and the castle were seized and fortified by the Jacobites. However they were driven north by the forces of William Augustus, Duke of Cumberland, the son of George II. Carlisle was recaptured, and the Jacobites were jailed and executed. That battle marked the end of the castle's fighting life, as defending the border between England and Scotland was not necessary with both countries again one in Great Britain.
After 1746, the castle became somewhat neglected, although some minor repairs were undertaken such as that of the drawbridge in 1783.
Some parts of the castle were then demolished for use as raw materials in the 19th century to create more or less what is visible to the visitor today. The Army moved in to take hold of the castle, which was the regimental depot of the Border Regiment until 1959, when The Regiment amalgamated with the King's Own Royal Regiment (Lancaster) to form the King's Own Royal Border Regiment. The Army Reserve still use parts of the castle: 8 Platoon C Company 4th Battalion the Duke of Lancaster's Regiment are based within the Burma Block. The Castle also houses The King’s Own Border Regiment Museum.
Governors appointed by:
Henry II:
Robert de Vaux, Baron of Gillesland
John:
William de Stuteville, Baron of Lyddal
Henry III:
Robert de Vaux
Robert de Veteripont
William de Dacre
Thomas de Multon
John Baliol (later King of Scotland)
Robert de Brus, 5th Lord of Annandale (-1255 & 1267-)
William III de Forz, 4th Earl of Albemarle
Eustace de Baliol
Roger de Leiburne
Edward I:
Robert de Hampton
Richard de Holebrok
John de Swinburn
Gilbert de Curwen of Workington
William de Boyville
Robert de Brus, 6th Lord of Annandale (1295-))
Michael de Harela
John de Halton, Bishop of Carlisle
Alexander de Bassenthwaite
Edward II:
John de Castre
Andrew de Harcla, 1st Earl of Carlisle
Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall
Ralph Fitz William, baron of Greystoke
John de Halton, Bishop of Carlisle (2nd time)
Edward III:
Ralph Dacre, 1st Baron Dacre
Anthony Lord Lucy of Cockermouth
John de Glanton
John Kirby, Bishop of Carlisle
Sir Hugh de Moresby
Thomas, Lord Lucy
Roland de Vaux
Sir Richard de Denton
Sir Hugh de Lowther
Richard II:
Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland
Ralph Lord Neville de Raby
John Lord Moss of Hamlake
John Halland, Earl of Huntington
Sir Lewis Clifford
Henry IV;
Henry Lord Percy, surnamed Hotspur, Governor and General of the Marches
Edward IV;
Richard Duke of Gloucester (later Richard III of England)
Richard III:
Sir Richard Salkeld of Corby
Henry VII;
Sir Richard Salkeld of Corby
Henry VIII;
Thomas Lord Warton
William Lord Dacre of Gillesland
Edward VI:
William Lord Dacre of Gillesland
Mary I:
William Lord Dacre of Gillesland
Elizabeth I:
Henry Lord Scrope of Bolton
William Lord Dacre of Gillesland
Charles I:
Sir Nicholas Byron
Sir Henry Stradling
Sir John Brown
Sir William Douglas
Sir William Levingston
Sir Philip Musgrave Bart.
Jeremiah Tolhurst Esq.
Colonel Thomas Fitch
Charles II:
December 1660: Sir Philip Musgrave, 2nd Baronet
1678: Charles Howard, 1st Earl of Carlisle
1684/5: Sir Christopher Musgrave, 4th Baronet
James II:
1687: Sir Francis Howard of Corby
December 1688: Sir Christopher Musgrave, 4th Baronet
William III:
1689: Sir John Lowther, 2nd Baronet
1690: Jeremiah Bubb
March 1693: Charles Howard, 3rd Earl of Carlisle
George II:
1739: Lt Gen. John Folliot
12 August 1749: Gen. Sir Charles Howard
1752: Gen. John Stanwix
George III:
July 1763: Henry Vane, 2nd Earl of Darlington
22 September 1792: Lt Gen. Montgomery Agnew
8 September 1818: Lt Gen. Robert Burne
George IV:
18 June 1825: Maj. Gen. Sir George Adam Wood Kt. CB
William IV:
28 April 1831: Lt Gen. Hon. James Ramsay, son of the Earl of Dalhousie
Victoria:
The post of Governor of Carlisle was abolished in 1838.
1724–1749: Sir Charles Howard
12 August 1749: Cromwell Ward
Grade I listed buildings in Cumbria
Listed buildings in Carlisle, Cumbria
Castles in Great Britain and Ireland
List of castles in England
Siege of Carlisle
High Sheriff of Cumberland
McCarthy, M R; Summerson, H R T; Annis, R G (1990), Carlisle Castle, A survey and documentary history, English Heritage, ISBN 1-85074-271-5 
