Neunkirchen am Brand is a municipality in the district of Forchheim in Bavaria in Germany.
Important dates are the founding of the Canons Regular of Saint Augustine monastery, Neunkirchen am Brand monastery, in 1314 and the conferment of the status as market town in 1410. In 1803 Neunkirchen along with the Prince-Bishopric of Bamberg became part of Bavaria. Between 1886 and 1963 Neunkirchen was located near a train route from Erlangen to Eschenau.
After the Second World War, refugees settled in Neunkirchen and after the establishment of Siemens AG in Erlangen the town experienced a dramatic increase in inhabitants. Numerous suburbs were built around the traditional center of the town.
Neunkirchen is also the home of a number of industrial and trade companies. The largest industrial employer is the axles factory, the Neunkirchener Achsenfabrik (NAF).
There are the following districts (pop. statistics as of December 31, 2006):
Neunkirchen (5995 inhabitants)
Baad (85 inhabitants)
Ebersbach (250 inhabitants)
Ermreuth (921 inhabitants)
Großenbuch (575 inhabitants)
Rödlas (149 inhabitants)
Rosenbach (261 inhabitants)
Gleisenhof (near Ermreuth) and Wellucken (7 inhabitants)
Furthermore, there the farms Vogelhof, Erleinhof and Saarmühle.
The town is marked by well preserved gates, the former Neunkirchen am Brand Monastery, countless timbered houses and a Middle Age warehouse known as a Zehntscheune.
In the district of Ermreuth, the former synagogue was restored as a venue for various events. Worth seeing in this districts are also the church and the castle.
On Good Friday, there is a famous and in this form very rare procession of holy figures
On every second Saturday before St. Anna (July 26), everyone is invited to the local fair. Local clubs present themselves with their own stands and on a stage.
The Neunkirchen church anniversary (Kirchweih or Kerwa) takes place on the weekend of the first Sunday in October.
A Christmas market at St.-Michaels Church is always on the third weekend of Advent.
Deerlijk in Belgium
Tótkomlós in Hungary
