Seyyed Hossein Nasr (Persian: سید حسین نصر‎‎, born April 7, 1933) is an Iranian University Professor of Islamic studies at George Washington University, and an Islamic philosopher. He is the author of scholarly books and articles.
Nasr speaks and writes based on subjects such as philosophy, religion, spirituality, music, art, architecture, science, literature, civilizational dialogues, and the natural environment. He also wrote two books of poetry (namely Poems of the Way and The Pilgrimage of Life and the Wisdom of Rumi), and has been described as a 'polymath'.
Nasr speaks Persian, English, French, Spanish and Arabic fluently.
Nasr was born in 1933 in south-central Tehran to Seyyed Valiallah, who was a physician to the Persian royal family, and one of the founders of modern education in Iran. His parents were originally from Kashan. He is a descendant of Sheikh Fazlollah Nouri from his mother's side, and is the cousin of Iranian philosopher Ramin Jahanbegloo, and the father of American academic Vali Nasr.
Nasr went to Firuz Bahram High School in Tehran before being sent to the United States for education at thirteen. In the US, Nasr first attended Peddie School in Hightstown, New Jersey, graduating in 1950 as the valedictorian of his class and also winner of the Wyclifte Award.
A scholarship offered by MIT in physics made him the first Iranian undergraduate to attend that university. There, he also began studying under Giorgio de Santillana and others in various other branches such as metaphysics and philosophy. During his studies there he became acquainted with the works of the perennialist authority Frithjof Schuon. This school of thought has shaped Nasr's life and thinking ever since. Nasr has been a disciple of Frithjof Schuon for over fifty years and his works are based on the doctrine and the viewpoints of the perennial philosophy.
Upon his graduation from MIT, Nasr obtained a master's degree in geology and geophysics in 1956, and went on to pursue his Ph.D. degree in the history of science and learning at Harvard University. He planned to write his dissertation under the supervision of George Sarton, but Sarton died before he could begin his dissertation work and so he wrote his dissertation under the direction of I. Bernard Cohen, Hamilton Gibb, and Harry Wolfson.
At the age of twenty-five, Nasr graduated with his Ph.D. from Harvard and completed his first book, Science and Civilization in Islam. His doctoral dissertation entitled "Conceptions of Nature in Islamic Thought" was published in 1964 by Harvard University Press as An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines.
Nasr began his teaching career in 1955 when he was still a young doctoral student at Harvard University. He became a full professor by the age of 30.
After Harvard, Nasr returned to Iran as a professor at Tehran University, and then at Arya Mehr University (Sharif University) where he was appointed president in 1972. Before that, he served as Dean of The Faculty of Letters, and Academic Vice-Chancellor of Tehran University from 1968 to 1972.
Nasr also learned Islamic philosophy from the philosophers Allameh Tabatabaei, Sayyid Abul-Hasan Qazwini and Sayyid Muhammad Kazim Assar during that period leading up to the revolution.
In the 1970s, Farah Pahlavi of Iran appointed Nasr as head of the Imperial Iranian Academy of Philosophy, the first academic institution to be conducted in accordance with the intellectual principles of the Traditionalist School. During that time, Nasr, Tabatabaei, William Chittick, Kenneth Morgan, Sachiko Murata, Toshihiko Izutsu, and Henry Corbin held various philosophical discourses. The book Shi'a Islam was one product of this period.
Upon his return to the west, Nasr took up positions at University of Edinburgh, Temple University, and since 1984 has been at The George Washington University where he is now a full-time University Professor of Islamic Studies.
Nasr helped with the planning and expansion of Islamic and Iranian studies academic programs in several universities such as Princeton, the University of Utah, and the University of Southern California.
He was an advisor for the award-winning, PBS-broadcast documentary Muhammad: Legacy of a Prophet (2002), produced by Unity Productions Foundation.
In year 2000, a volume was devoted to him in the Library of Living Philosophers.
Templeton Religion and Science Award (1999)
First Muslim and first non-Western scholar to deliver the prestigious Gifford Lectures.
Honorary Doctor of Uppsala University, Sweden (1977)
Nasr is the author of over fifty books and five hundred articles (a number of which can be found in the journal, Studies in Comparative Religion) on topics such as Traditionalist metaphysics, Islamic science, religion and the environment, Sufism, and Islamic philosophy. Listed below are most of Nasr's works in English (in no particular order), including translations, edited volumes, and Festschriften in his honor:
As Author 
An Introduction to Islamic Cosmological Doctrines: Conceptions of Nature and Methods Used for Its Study by the Ikhwan al-Safa, al-Biruni, and Ibn Sina (1964)
Three Muslim Sages: Avicenna—Suhrawardi—Ibn Arabi (1964)
Ideals and Realities of Islam (1966)
Science and Civilization in Islam, with a preface by Giorgio de Santillana (1968)
Islamic Studies: Essays on Law and Society, the Sciences, and Philosophy and Sufism (1967)
The Encounter of Man and Nature: The Spiritual Crisis of Modern Man (1968)
Sufi Essays (1972)
Islam and the Plight of Modern Man (1975)
Islamic Science: An Illustrated Study, with photographs by Roland Michaud (1976)
Sadr al-Din Shirazi and His Transcendent Theosophy: Background, Life and Works, 2nd edition (1977)
Knowledge and the Sacred: The Gifford Lectures,Free Download In Several Formats  (1981)
Islamic Life and Thought (1981)
Islamic Art and Spirituality (1986)
Traditional Islam in the Modern World (1987)
A Young Muslim's Guide to the Modern World (1993)
The Need for a Sacred Science (1993)
The Islamic Intellectual Tradition in Persia, edited by Mehdi Aminrazavi (1994)
Muhammad: Man of God (1995)
Religion and the Order of Nature: The 1994 Cadbury Lectures at the University of Birmingham (1996)
Poems of the Way; put to music by Sami Yusuf in Songs of the Way (vol. 1) (1999)
Islam: Religion, History, and Civilization (2001)
The Heart of Islam: Enduring Values for Humanity (2002)Free Download
Islamic Philosophy from its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in the Land of Prophecy (2006)
The Pilgrimage of Life and the Wisdom of Rumi: Poems and Translations (2007)
The Garden of Truth: The Vision and Promise of Sufism, Islam's Mystical Tradition (2007)
Islam, Science, Muslims, and Technology: Seyyed Hossein Nasr in Conversation with Muzaffar Iqbal (2007)
The Essential Seyyed Hossein Nasr, edited by William Chittick (2007)
Islam in the Modern World (2012)
As Editor
An Annotated Bibliography of Islamic Science, edited with William Chittick and Peter Zirnis (3 vols., 1975)
Isma'ili Contributions to Islamic Culture (1977)
The Essential Frithjof Schuon (1986)
Shi'ism: Doctrines, Thought, and Spirituality, edited with Seyyed Vali Reza Nasr and Hamid Dabashi (1988)
Expectation of the Millennium: Shi'ism in History, edited with Seyyed Vali Reza Nasr and Hamid Dabashi (1989)
Islamic Spirituality (Vol. 1: Foundations, 1987; Vol. 2: Manifestations, 1990)
Religion of the Heart: Essays Presented to Frithjof Schuon on his Eightieth Birthday, edited with William Stoddart (1991)
In Quest of the Sacred: The Modern World in the Light of Tradition, edited with Katherine O'Brien (1994)
History of Islamic Philosophy, edited with Oliver Leaman (1995)
Mecca the Blessed, Medina the Radiant: The Holiest Cities of Islam, photographs by Kazuyoshi Nomachi; essay by Seyyed Hossein Nasr (1997)
An Anthology of Philosophy in Persia, edited with Mehdi Aminrazavi (5 vols., 1st in 1999)
The Essential Sophia, edited with Katherine O'Brien (2006)
The Study Quran (Editor-in-Chief; Caner Dagli, Maria Dakake, and Joseph Lumbard (General editors); Mohammed Rustom (Assistant editor; 2015)
As Translator
Shi'ite Islam by Sayyid Muhammad Husayn Tabataba'i
The Book of Metaphysical Penetrations by Mulla Sadra (edited, introduced, and annotated by Ibrahim Kalin)
Works About Nasr
The Works of Seyyed Hossein Nasr Through His Fortieth Birthday, edited by William Chittick
Knowledge is Light: Essays in Honor of Seyyed Hossein Nasr, edited by Zailan Moris
Beacon of Knowledge - Essays in Honor of Seyyed Hossein Nasr, edited by Mohammad Faghfoory
Islam, Modernity, and the Human Sciences (second part of the book), by Ali Zaidi
Religious Pluralism in Christian and Islamic Philosophy: The Thought of John Hick and Seyyed Hossein Nasr, by Adnan Aslan
In Search of the Sacred with Ramin Jahanbegloo
From the Pen of Seyyed Hossein Nasr: A Bibliography of His Works Through His Eightieth Year, edited by Nicholas Boylston, Oludamini Ogunnaike, and Syed A.H. Zaidi
Higher Education in Iran
Iranian traditional humanism
Islamic Texts Society
Sufi studies
Narrated by court
