A cartulary or chartulary (/ˈkɑːrtjʊləri/, Latin: cartularium or chartularium), also called pancarta or codex diplomaticus, is a medieval manuscript volume or roll (rotulus) containing transcriptions of original documents relating to the foundation, privileges, and legal rights of ecclesiastical establishments, municipal corporations, industrial associations, institutions of learning, or families. The term is sometimes also applied to collections of original documents bound in one volume or attached to one another so as to form a roll, as well as to custodians of such collections.
The allusion of Gregory of Tours to chartarum tomi in the 6th century is commonly taken to refer to cartularies. The oldest surviving cartularies, however, originated in the 10th century. Those from the 10th to the 13th centuries are very numerous.
Cartularies frequently contain historical texts, known as cartulary chronicles, which may focus on the history of the monastery whose legal documents it accompanies, or may be a more general history of the world. This link between legal and historical writings has to be understood in the context of the importance of past events for establishing legal precedence.
Generally speaking, a cartulary attested by the signatures or marks of a number of prominent individuals ranks as a public document possessing greater value than a private letter or the narrative of an annalist.
Sometimes the copyist of the cartulary reproduced the original documents with literal exactness. On the other hand, some copyists took liberties with the text, including modifying the phraseology, modernizing proper names of persons and places, and even changing the substance, so as to extend the scope of the privileges or immunities granted in the document. The value of a cartulary as a historical document depends not only on how faithfully it reproduces the substance of the original, but also, if edited, on the clues it contains to the motivation for those changes. These questions are generally the subject of scrutiny under well-known canons of historical criticism.
No complete inventory of the cartularies of the various institutions of the Middle Ages exists, but many cartularies of medieval monasteries and churches have been published, more or less completely. The Catalogue général des cartulaires des archives départementales (Paris, 1847) and the Inventaire des cartulaires etc. (Paris, 1878–9) were the chief sources of information regarding the cartularies of medieval France. For the principal English (printed) cartularies, see Gross, Sources and Literature of English History, etc. (London, 1900), 204–7 and 402–67. The important cartulary of the University of Paris was edited by Father Denifle, O.P., and M. Chatelain, Chartularium Universitatis Parisiensis (Paris, 1889, sqq). There may be more recent developments in cataloguing.
A cartulary may take the form of a book or a codex. Documents, chronicles or other kinds of handwritten texts were compiled, transcribed or copied to the cartulary. The cartulary was a multi-purpose type of medieval document that functioned like a handwritten technology.
Michael Clanchy attended to the monastic origin of both chronicles and cartularies, and he defines the latter as "a collection of title deeds copied into a register for greater security".
In the introduction to the book Les Cartulaires, it is argued that in the contemporary diplomatic world it was common to provide a strict definition as the organized, selective, or exhaustive transcription of diplomatic records, made by the owner of them or by the producer of the archive where the documents are preserved.
In the Dictionary of Archival Terminology a cartulary is defined as "a register, usually in volume form, of copies of charters, title deeds, grants of privileges and other documents of significance belonging to a person, family or institution". In 1938, the French historian, Emile Lesne, wrote: "Every Cartulary is the testimony of the statement of the Archives in a Church at the time when it was compiled".
Related terms in other languages are: cartularium (Latin); Kopiar, Kopialbuch (German), Chartular (Oes.); cartolario, cartulario, cartario (Italian); cartulario (Spanish).
In medieval Normandy, a type of cartulary was common from the early 11th century that combined a record of gifts to the monastery with a short narrative. These works are known as pancartes.
Cartularios de Valpuesta, two medieval cartularies from the north of Spain.
Hemming's Cartulary, two cartularies bound together, the Liber Wigorniensis, made in England around the year 1000, and a second compiled by Hemming about a hundred years later.
Cartulary of Windsheim,O.E.S.A. made in Germany (Windsheim) between 1421-1462.
Supetar cartulary, a twelfth-century cartulary of the monastery of St. Peter in Poljice, Croatia
Cartulario de Óvila, of the monastery Santa María de Óvila
Liber feudorum maior, a twelfth-century cartulary of the Crown of Aragon
Liber feudorum formae minoris, an early thirteenth-century continuation of the Liber feudorum maior
Liber instrumentorum memorialium, an early thirteenth-century cartulary of the Lords of Montpellier
Liber instrumentorum vicecomitalium, also called the Trencavel Cartulary and the Foix Cartulary, a thirteenth-century French collection
Liber feudorum Ceritaniae, a thirteenth-century cartulary of the County of Cerdanya
The Tropenell Cartulary, from the west of England estates of Thomas Tropenell, 15th century
Chartularium Sithiense or Abbey of Saint Bertin's cartulary, written in Latin and whose first part is attributed to Folquin (or Saint Folquin, died 14 December 855 in Esquelbeques)
The Register of St Osmund, a 13th-century cartulary belonging to Salisbury Cathedral.
The late Roman/Byzantine chartoularios was an administrative and fiscal official. In the Greek Orthodox Church, the corresponding position was called chartophylax. This title was also given to an ancient officer in the Roman Church, who had the care of charters and papers relating to public affairs. The chartulary presided in ecclesiastical judgments, in lieu of the Pope.
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "article name needed". Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton. 
 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain: Chambers, Ephraim, ed. (1728). "article name needed". Cyclopædia, or an Universal Dictionary of Arts and Sciences (first ed.). James and John Knapton, et al. 
