A megachurch is an American term for a church having 2,000 or more people in average weekend attendance.
The origins of the megachurch movement, with a large number of local congregants who return on a weekly basis can be traced to the 1950s. There were large churches earlier in history, but they were considerably rarer. Examples include Charles Spurgeon's Baptist Metropolitan Tabernacle in London which attracted 5,000 weekly for years in the late 19th century, and religious broadcaster Aimee Semple McPherson's Angelus Temple in Los Angeles, which was similarly large.
The Leadership Network contains a directory of all megachurches evangelical Christian of the world (excluding Canada and USA), on its.   This global list has over 270 megachurches in 2015. The Hartford Institute has compiled directories in Canada and the USA. The US list has more than 1,668 megachurches in 2015  and the Canadian list 22.  We can estimate that there are over 1,960 megachurches evangelical globally in 2015.
Globally, these large congregations are a significant development in evangelical Christianity. In the United States, the phenomenon has more than quadrupled in the past two decades. It has since spread worldwide. In 2007, five of the ten largest Evangelical churches were in South Korea. The largest megachurch in the United States is Lakewood Church in Houston, Texas with more than 40,000 members every weekend and the current largest megachurch in the world is South Korea's Yoido Full Gospel Church, an Assemblies of God church, with more than 830,000 members as of 2007. On one weekend in November 2015, around one in ten Protestant churchgoers in the US, or about 5 million people, attended service in a megachurch. While 3,000 individual Catholic parishes (churches) have 2,000 or more attendants for an average Sunday Mass, these churches are not seen as part of the megachurch movement.
The majority of North American churchgoers attend small churches of fewer than 200 members.
Civil rights activist and minister Al Sharpton has claimed that megachurches focus on personal morality issues while ignoring social justice.
Some megachurches, such as the Christian Open Door, are sometimes criticized by former members and anti-cult associations for an alleged use of cultic practices.
List of the largest Protestant churches in the United States
