Siddhis (Sanskrit and Pali; Devanagari सिद्धि; Tibetan: དངོས་གྲུབ, THL: ngödrup, Chinese: 神通,悉地, 成就) are spiritual, paranormal, supernatural, or otherwise magical powers, abilities, and attainments that are the products of spiritual advancement through sādhanās such as meditation and yoga. The term ṛddhi (Pali: iddhi, "psychic powers") is often used interchangeably in Buddhism.
Siddhi is a Sanskrit noun which can be translated as "perfection", "accomplishment", "attainment", or "success". In Tamil the word Siddhar/Chitthar refers to someone who has attained the Siddhic powers & knowledge. Chitta is pure consciousness/knowledge in Sanskrit also.
The earliest appearance in Indian history of the idea that magical powers are generated by spiritual practices is the account of the use of jhāna to gain iddhi appearing in the Pāli Canon in the Samaññaphala Sutta of the Digha Nikaya.
The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali, compiled around 400 BC from many older traditions, goes into great depth about how to obtain various siddhis.
The term siddhi is later found in the Mahabharata.
In the Panchatantra, a siddhi may be the term for any unusual skill or faculty or capability.
In Hinduism, eight siddhis (Ashta Siddhi) or Eight great perfections (mahasiddhi) are known:
Aṇimā: reducing one's body even to the size of an atom
Mahima: expanding one's body to an infinitely large size
Garima: becoming infinitely heavy
Laghima: becoming almost weightless
Prāpti: having unrestricted access to all places
Prākāmya: realizing whatever one desires
Iṣṭva: possessing absolute lordship
Vaśtva: the power to subjugate all
In the Bhagavata Purana, the five siddhis of yoga and meditation are:
trikālajñatvam: knowing the past, present and future
advandvam: tolerance of heat, cold and other dualities
para citta ādi abhijñatā: knowing the minds of others and so on
agni arka ambu viṣa ādīnām pratiṣṭambhaḥ: checking the influence of fire, sun, water, poison, and so on
aparājayah: remaining unconquered by others
In the Bhagavata Purana, Krishna describes the ten secondary siddhis:
anūrmimattvam: Being undisturbed by hunger, thirst, and other bodily appetites
dūraśravaṇa: Hearing things far away
dūradarśanam: Seeing things far away
manojavah: Moving the body wherever thought goes (teleportation/astral projection)
kāmarūpam: Assuming any form desired
parakāya praveśanam: Entering the bodies of others
svachanda mṛtyuh: Dying when one desires
devānām saha krīḍā anudarśanam: Witnessing and participating in the pastimes of the gods
yathā sańkalpa saḿsiddhiḥ: Perfect accomplishment of one's determination
ājñāpratihatā gatiḥ: Orders or commands being unimpeded 
In the Samkhyakarika and Tattvasamasa, there are references to the attainment of eight siddhis by which one becomes free of the pain of ignorance, one gains knowledge, and experiences bliss. The eight siddhis hinted at by Kapila in the Tattvasamasa are as explained in verse 51 of the Samkhyakarika:
Uuha: based on the samskaras of previous births, the attainment of knowledge about the twenty-four Tatwas gained by examining the determinable and the indeterminable conscious and the non-conscious constituents of creation,
Shabda: knowledge gained by associating with an enlightened person (Guru – upadesh),
Addhyyan: knowledge gained through study of the Vedas and other standard ancillary texts,
Suhritprapti: knowledge gained from a kind-hearted person, while engaged in the spread of knowledge
Daan: knowledge gained regardless of one’s own needs while attending to the requirements of those engaged in the search of the highest truth,
Aadhyaatmik dukkh-haan: freedom from pain, disappointment, etc. that may arise due to lack of spiritual, metaphysical, mystic knowledge and experience,
Aadhibhautik dukkh-haan: freedom from pain etc. arising from possessing and being attached to various materialistic gains,
Aadhidaivik dukkh-haan: freedom from pain etc. caused by fate or due to reliance on fate,
The attainment of these eight siddhis renders one no longer in a painful state of ignorance but in possession of greater knowledge and experience of bliss. The aim of Samkhya is to eliminate all kinds of physical and mental pains and to receive liberation.
In Patañjali's Yoga Sutras IV.1 it is stated, Janma auṣadhi mantra tapaḥ samādhijāḥ siddhayaḥ, "Accomplishments may be attained through birth, the use of herbs, incantations, self-discipline or samadhi".
In Hinduism, both Ganesha and Hanuman possess the eight siddhis and can give one access to them.
In Sikhism, siddhi means "insight". "Eight Siddhis" is used for insight of the eight qualities of Nirankar or a.k.a. Akal Purakh mentioned in the Mul Mantar in the Guru Granth Sahib. God has eight qualities: Oankar, Satnam, Kartapurakh, Nirbhao, Nirvair, AkaalMurat, Ajooni and Svaibhang. The one who has insight of these qualities is called Sidh or Gurmukhi.
In Tantric Buddhism, siddhi specifically refers to the acquisition of supernatural powers by psychic or magical means or the supposed faculty so acquired. These powers include items such as clairvoyance, levitation, bilocation, becoming as small as an atom, materialization, having access to memories from past lives. The term is also used in this sense in the Sarva-darśana-saṃgraha of Madhvacharya (1238–1317).
Abhijñā
Kundalini
Magic (paranormal)
Parapsychology
Rāja yoga
Samadhi
Samyama
Transcendental Meditation technique#TM-Sidhi program
Vibhuti
Yoga
Robert Adams
