The Homeric Hymns are a collection of thirty-three anonymous Ancient Greek hymns celebrating individual gods. The hymns are "Homeric" in the sense that they employ the same epic meter—dactylic hexameter—as the Iliad and Odyssey, use many similar formulas and are couched in the same dialect. They were uncritically attributed to Homer himself in Antiquity—from the earliest written reference to them, Thucydides (iii.104)—and the label has stuck. "The whole collection, as a collection, is Homeric in the only useful sense that can be put upon the word;" A. W. Verrall noted in 1894, "that is to say, it has come down labeled as 'Homer' from the earliest times of Greek book-literature."
The oldest of the hymns were probably written in the seventh century BC, somewhat later than Hesiod and the usually accepted date for the writing down of the Homeric epics. This still places the older Homeric Hymns among the oldest monuments of Greek literature; but although most of them were composed in the seventh and sixth centuries, a few may be Hellenistic, and the Hymn to Ares might be a late pagan work, inserted when it was observed that a hymn to Ares was lacking. Walter Burkert has suggested that the Hymn to Apollo, attributed by an ancient source to Cynaethus of Chios (a member of the Homeridae), was composed in 522 BC for performance at the unusual double festival held by Polycrates of Samos to honor Apollo of Delos and of Delphi.
The hymns, which must be the remains of a once more strongly represented genre, vary widely in length, some being as brief as three or four lines, while others are in excess of five hundred lines. The long ones comprise an invocation, praise, and narrative, sometimes quite extended. In the briefest ones, the narrative element is lacking. The longer ones show signs of having been assembled from pre-existing disparate materials.
Most surviving Byzantine manuscripts begin with the third Hymn. A chance discovery in Moscow in 1777 recovered the two hymns that open the collection, the fragmentary To Dionysus and To Demeter (complete save some lacunose lines), in a single fifteenth-century manuscript. Some at least of the shorter ones may be excerpts that have omitted the narrative central section, preserving only the useful invocation and introduction, which a rhapsode could employ in the manner of a prelude.
The thirty-three hymns praise most of the major gods of Greek mythology; at least the shorter ones may have served as preludes to the recitation of epic verse at festivals by professional rhapsodes: often the singer concludes by saying that now he will pass to another song. A thirty-fourth, To Hosts is not a hymn, but a reminder that hospitality is a sacred duty enjoined by the gods, a pointed reminder when coming from a professional rhapsode.
To Dionysus, 21 lines
To Demeter, 495 lines
To Apollo, 546 lines
To Hermes, 580 lines
To Aphrodite, 293 lines
To Aphrodite, 21 lines
To Dionysus, 59 lines
To Ares, 17 lines
To Artemis, 9 lines
To Aphrodite, 6 lines
To Athena, 5 lines
To Hera, 5 lines
To Demeter, 3 lines
To the mother of the gods, 6 lines
To Heracles with the heart of a lion, 9 lines
To Asclepius, 5 lines
To the Dioscuri, 5 lines
To Hermes, 12 lines
To Pan, 49 lines
To Hephaestus, 8 lines
To Apollo, 5 lines
To Poseidon, 7 lines
To Zeus, 4 lines
To Hestia, 5 lines
To the Muses and Apollo, 7 lines
To Dionysus, 13 lines
To Artemis, 22 lines
To Athena, 18 lines
To Hestia, 13 lines
To Gaia, mother of all, 19 lines
To Helios, 20 lines
To Selene, 20 lines
To the Dioscuri, 19 lines
The Homeric Hymns, Apostolos N. Athanassakis (translation, introduction and notes) Baltimore, MD; Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976. ISBN 0-8018-1792-7
The Homeric Hymns: A Translation, with Introduction and Notes, Diane Rayor (2004, updated 2014). This translation sets the hymns in their context of Greek folklore, culture and geography, and offers parallels with Near Eastern texts.
Homeric Hymns, Sarah Ruden, trans. (Indianapolis: Hackett, 2005)
To Demeter (Εἲς Δημήτραν):
Gregory Nagy
Hugh Gerard Evelyn-White, Perseus Digital Library
Greek text
Thomas W. Allen, William R. Halliday, and Edward E. Sikes, The Homeric Hymns. Oxford: 1936.
Andrew Faulkner, ed. The Homeric hymns : interpretative essays. Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2011.
