Lukáš Rosol (Czech pronunciation: [ˈlukaːʃ ˈrosol]; born 24 July 1985) is a Czech professional tennis player. Rosol competes on the ATP Challenger Tour and the ATP World Tour, both in singles and doubles. Rosol was coached by former Czech player, 1999 US Open quarterfinalist Ctislav Doseděl. His career-high singles ranking is World No. 26, achieved on 22 September 2014.
His first notable victory was against World No. 8 Jürgen Melzer at the 2011 French Open, whom he defeated in five sets in the second round a year after Melzer had reached the semi-final. A year later, Rosol defeated World No. 2 Rafael Nadal in the second round of Wimbledon to achieve one of the biggest wins in his career. Rosol has had sustained success since then having played an integral part in the Czech Republic's Davis Cup winning team in 2012, and winning his first tour-level title in April 2013.
Rosol also played in the longest ever ATP doubles match, alongside Tomáš Berdych, defeating Marco Chiudinelli and Stanislas Wawrinka in the 1st round of the 2013 Davis Cup. The match was played on 2 February 2013, lasting 7 hours, 2 minutes. It was the second longest ATP match of any kind, after the Isner–Mahut match at the 2010 Wimbledon Championships.
Rosol was born in Brno, Czechoslovakia. In November 2008, he married Czech athlete Denisa Rosolová (née Ščerbová). In 2011, they divorced. In 2013, Rosol became engaged to news presenter Michaela Ochotská. Their son André was born in January 2015. The pair married in July 2015.
Rosol has won 8 Challenger and 7 Futures tournaments. In April 2013, he won his first tour-level tournament: the BRD Nastase Tiriac Trophy ATP World Tour 250 and in August 2014, he won his first tour-level tournament on hard courts: the Winston-Salem Open ATP World Tour 250.
Rosol rose to prominence in 2012 at the Wimbledon Championships. He had participated in the Wimbledon qualifying draw multiple times, not reaching main draw until 2012. In the first round, he defeated Ivan Dodig, then he was drawn against the two time champion and World No. 2, Rafael Nadal. After losing the first set in a very close tiebreak, Rosol regrouped and broke in the first game of the second. A dominant serving performance allowed him to take the second set 6-4. Rosol's service game held up in the third set, where he capitalized on a sloppy game by Nadal and took the set 6-4. Down two sets to one, Nadal raised his level in the fourth, taking the set 6-2 and sending the match into a deciding fifth set. At this point the match was delayed by 35 minutes in order to close the Centre Court roof. Rosol returned from the break revitalized, taking the fifth set 6-4 by striking 20 winners to only 2 unforced errors. His groundstroke speed averaged 85 mph and peaked at 114 mph. In the final game of the match, Rosol delivered 3 aces and a forehand winner to close out one of the greatest upsets in Grand Slam history by a score of 6–7(9–11), 6–4, 6–4, 2–6, 6–4. He went on to lose his third round match against Philipp Kohlschreiber in straight sets.
In the doubles draw, Rosol and partner Mikhail Kukushkin defeated the British duo of Colin Fleming and Ross Hutchins in 5 sets in the first round. They lost in the second round to James Cerretani and Édouard Roger-Vasselin.
At the 2013 Australian Open, Rosol defeated Jamie Baker of Great Britain in the first round. He subsequently lost to 13th seed Milos Raonic in the second round.
In April, he won his first ATP Tour singles tournament with a victory in Bucharest. He was unseeded in the tournament and beat three seeded players en route to the final: 3rd seed Andreas Seppi, 8th seed Viktor Troicki and 2nd seed Gilles Simon. In the final, he defeated Guillermo García-López, only dropping one set throughout the entire tournament and tearfully dedicating the triumph to his father, who introduced him to tennis and deceased two weeks prior.
At the French Open, Rosol lost in the second round to Fabio Fognini in four sets.
Rosol began his 2014 season at the Qatar ExxonMobil Open in Doha, losing in straight sets to eventual champion Rafael Nadal.
Rosol then played in the 2014 Apia International Sydney. He beat his first round opponent João Sousa in three sets 7–6, 4–6, 7–6. This win would set up a match with the Tournament's fourth seed Dmitry Tursunov.
Rosol lost to eventual champion Roger Federer in the quarter-finals of the Dubai Tennis Championships.
At Indian Wells, Rosol faced reigning Wimbledon champion Andy Murray in the second round and was defeated in three sets after leading by a set and a break.
At the 2014 Wimbledon Championships he was one point from a two set lead against Rafael Nadal in the second round, but this time Nadal came back to win in four sets.
At the 2014 MercedesCup in Stuttgart Rosol reached the final beating Mikhail Youzhny along the way, in the final he lost in 3 sets to the fast rising Spaniard Roberto Bautista Agut
In August, Rosol won his second ATP title at the Winston-Salem Open defeating Jerzy Janowicz in 3 tight sets, Rosol had to save numerous match points in this hard hitting contest. Lukas moved up to a ranking of 26th in the World, a career high, in the ATP Ranking released 22 September 2014.
In 2015, Rosol lost in second round of the Australian Open. At Indian Wells he defeated Pablo Andújar, Martin Kližan and Robin Haase to reach fourth round, where he lost to Tomas Berdych. At Miami he lost in third round to David Ferrer.
At the French Open, Rosol defeated seeded player Roberto Bautista Agut to reach third round. He also reached his first grandslam quarterfinals in doubles with Radu Albot.
At the Wimbledon, Rosol defeated former No.10 player Ernests Gulbis to reach second round, where he fell to Pablo Andújar in five sets.
Current as far as the 2015 US Open.
