The Men's 800 metres competition at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom, was held at the Olympic Stadium on 6–9 August.
Reigning world champion David Rudisha won the race in 1:40.91, becoming the first person to break 1:41 and improving on his own world record (the first world record in an Olympic men's 800m final since 1976). The reigning world junior champion Nigel Amos finished second in 1:41.73, establishing a new world junior record and Botswana national record. In an exceptionally fast final, all runners except Abubaker Kaki (who ran a seasonal best) set personal bests, including three national records (Kenya, Botswana, and Ethiopia). The finishing times were the fastest recorded for each placing and it constituted the first time that eight athletes ran under 1:44 in the same race. All the athletes in the race produced times that would have won the final in Beijing. The eight place finisher, Andrew Osagie, produced a time that would have won the gold medal at all three of the previous Olympic 800m finals.
Rudisha led from the start of the race, easing from lane 4 to the break with a determined Kaki in tow. By the halfway mark in 49.28 Mohammed Aman lined up off Kaki's shoulder. During the next 200 meters, Rudisha put a gap on the field and Kaki began falling back. The scramble was on to see who had anything left or, like Kaki, who would pay the price. As Rudisha showed the strain of his effort, Nigel Amos and Timothy Kitum started to make up a little of the ground Rudisha had built up. Running at the back of the field, Duane Solomon and Nick Symmonds made a late run, finishing just a step out of the medals.
Amos' silver medal was the first Olympic medal ever for Botswana.
The competition had seven heats in the first round, three semi-finals and a final. The top three in the first round heats progressed, as did the three fastest non-qualifiers. The top two finishers in the semi-final race reached the finals and the two fastest runners outside these runners made up the eight finalists.
Prior to the competition, the existing World and Olympic records were as follows.
The following records were established during the competition:
The following national records were set during the competition.
All times are British Summer Time (UTC+1)
Qual. rule: first 3 of each heat (Q) plus the 3 fastest times (q) qualified.
Qual. rule: first 2 of each heat (Q) plus the 2 fastest times (q) qualified.
