Ivan Dodig (born 2 January 1985) is a Croatian tennis player. His career-high ATP rankings are world No. 29 in singles and world No. 4 in doubles. Dodig is a Grand Slam champion after winning the 2015 French Open men's doubles title with Marcelo Melo.
At the 2010 Australian Open, he qualified for the main draw and beat former world no. 1 Juan Carlos Ferrero in the first round in five sets. However, he bowed out to Stefan Koubek in the second round.
Dodig then had a pretty average year, playing many Challenger tournaments throughout the year. He failed to qualify for the 2010 French Open, but he notably reached the second round at 2010 Wimbledon Championships, beating Óscar Hernández before stretching Sam Querrey to four tough sets. He also reached the second round at the 2010 US Open, after beating Fernando González, who retired with a knee injury, but Dodig retired himself with an injury against Thiemo de Bakker.
At the 2011 Australian Open, Dodig played Ivo Karlović in the first round and prevailed in a tough five set match. He was then drawn to play third seed and eventual champion Novak Djokovic in the second round. Although he lost in four sets, he was the only player to win a set against Djokovic in the whole tournament.
He followed this up with a surprise first tournament win in front of his home crowd at the 2011 PBZ Zagreb Indoors, beating the previous year's finalist Michael Berrer.
He then made a second-round appearance at the 2011 Regions Morgan Keegan Championships, losing to the comeback kid Juan Martín del Potro. Dodig then reached the quarterfinals at the 2011 Delray Beach International Tennis Championships after beating Kunitsyn and Sela, before losing to Janko Tipsarević
First-round action in the Davis Cup, a showdown between Croatia and Germany, saw Dodig up against Kohlschreiber, but he succumbed to the German in five sets. The loss proved costly, as Germany went on to prevail 3–2 in the tie to move on to the quarterfinals.
At the 2011 Sony Ericsson Open he beat Andrey Golubev in the first round. However, he lost to World No.4 Robin Söderling despite being up 4–2 in the third set.
At the 2011 Monte-Carlo Rolex Masters, he bowed out to World No.29 Tommy Robredo in the first round.
Dodig then found some good form heading into the 2011 Barcelona Open Banco Sabadell tournament. In the opening round he beat Vincent Millot before beating No.3 seed and last year's finalist Robin Söderling. He then went on to claim hard fought scalps over fast-rising Canadian Milos Raonic and home favourite Feliciano López to reach the semifinals of a clay-court tournament for the first time in his career. However in the semifinals, he was inevitably stopped by five-time champion and eventual champion for the 6th time, World No.1 Rafael Nadal who is still yet to lose a match on Barcelona soil. Despite breaking twice as he broke once in each set to hang on with Nadal, Dodig eventually fell after giving a decent fight, which added to the Spaniard's current winning streak on clay.
In the second round of the Rogers Cup, Dodig stunned world no. 2 Rafael Nadal, 1–6, 7–6, 7–6 after recovering from a 1–6, 1–3 deficit before losing to Janko Tipsarević in the third round.
On 30 August 2011, in the US Open first round Dodig lost to Nikolay Davydenko in a closely fought five sets match.
At the first gram slam of the year, the 2012 Australian Open he retired against Frederico Gil. At the next two slams he also lost in the first round to Robin Haase and Lukáš Rosol at the 2012 French Open and Wimbledon respectively. At the 2012 Summer Olympics he lost to Juan Martín del Potro in the first round of the men's singles. He fared better in the men's doubles, where he and partner Marin Čilić reached the quarter-finals. At the 2012 US Open he beat qualifier Hiroki Moriya in the first round, however lost his second round match against Andy Murray in straight sets.
Dodig had his most successful season to date, reaching the third round or better at 3 out of 4 Major tournaments, and breaking into the world's top 30 for the first time. At the Australian Open, Dodig reached the third round of a Grand Slam for the first time, beating Di Wu and Jarkko Nieminen respectively in the first two rounds, before losing to number 10 seed Richard Gasquet. He reached his first quarterfinal of the year at the PBZ Zagreb Indoors, losing to 3rd seed Mikhail Youzhny. At Indian Wells, Dodig defeated 28th seed Julien Benneteau en route to the third round before falling to world number 2 Roger Federer in straight sets.
During the clay court season, Dodig reached the semifinals of the BMW Open before falling to eventual champion Tommy Haas. However at the French Open, Dodig lost an extremely tight first round match to Guido Pella, losing 12 games to 10 in the fifth set. He then went on to have his best run at a Grand Slam event to date, due in part to some luck and a brace of injuries, reaching the fourth round at Wimbledon despite only completing one match. Philipp Kohlschreiber retired in the first round in the fifth set. He then beat Denis Kudla in straight sets, followed by Igor Sijsling retiring in the third set. In the fourth round, he led David Ferrer by a set, but eventually lost in four. He and his partner Marcelo Melo also finished as runners-up in the men's doubles to Bob and Mike Bryan.
At the 2014 Barcelona Open, Dodig beat world number 30 Feliciano López in second round and lost to Rafael Nadal in round of 16. At the Rome Masters, he defeated Federico Delbonis and Lukas Rosol, then was beaten in third round by Jérémy Chardy in round of 16. At the Canada Masters, the Croatian took wins over world number 14 John Isner and Andreas Seppi, after which he was defeated by fifth seeded David Ferrer.
Dodig had a strong showing in the men's doubles event at the 2015 Australian Open. Dodig and his partner Marcelo Melo reached the semifinals after falling to Pierre-Hugues Herbert and Nicolas Mahut.
During the clay court season, Dodig and Melo won their first title of the year at the Mexican Open after winning over Mariusz Fyrstenberg and Santiago González 7-6(7-2), 5-7, 10-3. At the 2015 French Open, Dodig and Melo won their maiden Grand Slam title beating Bob Bryan and Mike Bryan 6-7(5-7), 7-6(7-5), 7-5. This win helped Dodig to reach his career high ranking of world No.4 in doubles on June 8, 2015.
Following the grass court season, Dodig and Melo lost in the quarterfinals of the 2015 Wimbledon Championships to qualifiers Jonathan Erlich and Philipp Petzschner 6-4, 2-6, 2-6, 4-6.
On 16 November 2013 he married Maja Ćubela. He is a good friend of Marin Čilić. On 16 June 2014 his wife gave birth to their son, Petar.
Current through the 2016 Wimbledon Championships.
