Unai Emery Etxegoien (Spanish pronunciation: [uˈnai ˈemeɾi et͡ʃeˈɣoʝen]; born 3 November 1971) is a Spanish retired footballer who played as a left midfielder, and the current manager of French club Paris Saint-Germain FC.
He competed almost exclusively in Segunda División, amassing totals of 215 matches and nine goals during seven seasons. He subsequently embarked on a managerial career, spending several years in La Liga with Valencia and leading the team to three third-place finishes.
In 2013 Emery signed with Sevilla, taking the club to three consecutive Europa League victories before leaving for Paris Saint-Germain.
Born in Hondarribia, Gipuzkoa, Basque Country, Emery was a youth graduate of Real Sociedad, but never really broke into the first team (aged 24 he appeared in five La Liga games, scoring against Albacete Balompié in an 8–1 home win). After that, he resumed his career mostly in Segunda División.
Emery retired with Lorca Deportiva CF at the age of 32, after one season in Segunda División B.
As he was seriously injured in the knee while at Lorca in the 2004–05 season, Emery was offered the vacant manager position by the club president, and immediately helped it achieve promotion to the second division for the first time in its history, while beating top level side Málaga CF in the Copa del Rey.
In his second season, the Murcian club's first ever in the second level, the team finished fifth with 69 points, only five points off promotion to the top flight. It suffered relegation the following campaign, after the manager's departure.
Emery then moved to UD Almería in division two, and again helped his squads overachieve: after guiding to a first ever promotion in 2007, the Andalusian side finished eighth in the following campaign. This prompted a move to Valencia CF, as he succeeded Ronald Koeman.
In his first season with the Che, Emery led them to a sixth place-finish, with the subsequent qualification to the UEFA Europa League, in spite of the club's serious financial problems. He led his team to the round-of-32 in the UEFA Cup, a 3–3 aggregate loss against FC Dynamo Kyiv, and the quarter-finals of the domestic cup, exiting against Sevilla FC.
In 2009–10 Emery led Valencia to the third place, with the club returning to the UEFA Champions League after two years. In the season's Europa League the team lost in the quarter-finals to eventual winners Atlético Madrid, on the away goals rule, and exited in the round-of-16 in the Spanish cup against Deportivo de La Coruña, losing 3–4 on aggregate; in May 2010, he renewed his contract for another year.
The 2010–11 season started without David Villa and David Silva, sold to FC Barcelona and Manchester City respectively. Still, Emery managed to win five out of the first six league games (one draw), starting the Champions League campaign with a 4–0 win in Turkey against Bursaspor, a competition in which Valencia was eliminated in the round-of-16 by FC Schalke 04, being ousted in the same stage in the Spanish Cup by Villarreal CF. In the domestic league the team finished third, thus again qualifying to the Champions League.
Emery left the club in June 2012, after repeating the league position.
On 13 May 2012, Leonid Fedun, owner of Russian team FC Spartak Moscow, announced Emery as club coach for the following two seasons. On 25 November he was sacked after a run of poor results, the last a 1–5 derby home loss against FC Dynamo Moscow.
Emery returned to his country on 14 January 2013, replacing sacked Míchel at the helm of Sevilla. He led the club to the fifth position in his first full season and, on 14 May 2014, also won the Europa League after defeating S.L. Benfica on penalties.
After finishing the 2014–15 campaign in fifth place, one point behind former club Valencia, Emery again won the Europa League after defeating FC Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk, thus qualifying for the following Champions League. The victory meant that Sevilla became the most successful club in the history of the UEFA Cup/Europa League, with four trophies, and he signed a one-year contract extension on 5 June 2015 which kept him at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán Stadium until 2017, after reported interest from West Ham United and S.S.C. Napoli.
In 2015–16, Emery led Sevilla to the seventh position, having played the last games in the domestic league with several reserves and youth team players after the team confirmed their presence in the Europa League final. On 18 May 2016, after trailing 0–1 at half-time, one goal from Kévin Gameiro and a brace from Coke resulted in a 3–1 triumph against Liverpool at St. Jakob-Park.
On 12 June 2016, after Emery expressed his desire to leave Sevilla, the club announced both would be parting ways.
On 28 June 2016, Emery signed a two-year deal with the option of a third to succeed Laurent Blanc at French quadruple-holders Paris Saint-Germain FC.
Emery's father and grandfather, respectively named Juan and Antonio, were also footballers, both in the goalkeeper position. The former appeared for several clubs in the second tier, whilst the latter competed with Real Unión in the top level; his uncle, Román, played as a midfielder.
As of match played 22 May 2016
Sevilla
UEFA Europa League: 2013–14, 2014–15, 2015–16
Miguel Muñoz Trophy (Segunda División): 2005–06, 2006–07
La Liga Manager of the Month: March 2014, January 2015
List of UEFA Cup and Europa League winning managers
Unai Emery profile at BDFutbol
Unai Emery manager profile at BDFutbol
CiberChe biography (Spanish)
Unai Emery profile at Soccerway