Aleksandra Krunić (Serbian Cyrillic: Александра Крунић; born 15 March 1993) is a Russian-born Serbian professional tennis player. Krunić has won two doubles titles on the WTA Tour in her career. On 27 July 2015 Krunić reached her best singles rankings of world number 62. On 20 June 2016, she peaked at world number 56 in the doubles rankings.
Krunić was the runner–up of 2009 Australian Open in Girls' Doubles, along with Sandra Zaniewska. She made her WTA Tour debut at 2010 Banka Koper Slovenia Open, playing doubles with World No. 2 Jelena Janković. She made her WTA singles debut at the Poli-Farbe Budapest Grand Prix. In 2014 US Open, in her second main draw appearance at Grand Slam, Krunić won her first main draw match and then reached the fourth round, beating third seed Petra Kvitová in the process.
Krunić was born to Bratislav and Ivana Krunić, Serbian immigrants to Russia, and has a sister named Anastasia. She was born on 15 March 1993 in Moscow, Russia, she currently resides after Moscow and Bratislava in Belgrade. Krunić speaks Serbian, Slovak, Russian and English fluently.
Krunić picked up a tennis racquet aged seven. She began training tennis at the Spartak Moscow club, which spawned numerous tennis stars such as Anna Kournikova, Anastasia Myskina, Marat Safin, Igor Andreev and others. Since then Krunić has been coached by Edouard Safonov. In 2006 Krunić reached the semifinals of Junior Kremlin Cup, losing to Bulgarian Dalia Zafirova 6–7(10) 6–3 6–1, who eventually fell to Ksenia Kirillova in the final. The following year she won three junior events, in Podgorica, Livorno and Maia. In 2008 Krunić reached the quarterfinals of European Junior Championships in Moscow and won the junior event in Budapest. She also played at the junior event in Kramfors, however withdrew from the final match against Croatian Silvia Njirić due to injury by a score of 6–3, 6–1 for Njirić.
In 2009 she played the second round of 2009 Australian Open in Girls' Singles, and the final of Girls' Doubles event, partnering with Sandra Zaniewska. The two lost to Christina McHale and Ajla Tomljanović 6–1, 2–6, 10–4. She reached the second round of both Girls' Singles and Doubles at the 2009 French Open, and lost in the first round of Girls' Singles at the 2009 Wimbledon Championships. Krunić also partnered with Tamara Čurović at the Girls' Doubles event, however they lost in the first round to Tímea Babos and Ajla Tomljanović. In April 2009 she reached her highest junior ranking when she was ranked World No. 17.
Although she had decided not to play juniors anymore, Krunić took part in the European Championships organized by both ITF and Tennis Europe, along with Bojana Jovanovski and Doroteja Erić in the team of Serbia.
As a member of TK Red Star, Krunić won the national club championships in 2008. She was awarded with a wild card for tennis event in Prokuplje, Serbia, organized by the International Tennis Federation. On 6 July 2008 Krunić won the tournament and became the youngest ITF title winner in 2008 by winning this event. She beat one wildcard, third seed, and next three were qualifiers. In October 2008 she also played two ITF events in Dubrovnik, but lost both times in first round.
Krunić was invited by Serbia Fed Cup team coach Dejan Vraneš to join the team for the 2009 Fed Cup World Group Play-offs versus Spain. Jelena Janković and Ana Ivanovic secured Serbia 4–0 win. Krunić debuted in a doubles match played on 25 April 2009, along with Ana Jovanović, and they were down 6–2, 1–0 against Llagostera Vives and Domínguez Lino, when the match was cancelled due to rain. In 2009, Krunić won a total of three ITF titles, including first in doubles. On 14 September 2009 Krunić broke into the WTA Singles Ranking List, when she was ranked number 795.
In January 2010, Krunić won her fourth ITF tournament in Quanzhou, China, defeating domestic player Zhou Yi-Miao 6–3, 7–5 in the final, after beating top seed and compatriot Bojana Jovanovski in semifinal. In May, she won ITF singles title in Moscow and was the doubles runner–up. Krunić made her WTA Tour debut at 2010 Banka Koper Slovenia Open, playing doubles with World No. 2 and compatriot Jelena Janković. The two reached semifinals beating the fourth seeds Eleni Daniilidou and Jasmin Wöhr in process, but then had to withdraw from their semifinal match due to an injury of Janković.
In February 2011, Krunić was once again invited to play for the Serbia Fed Cup team in the World Group II rubber against Canada. She lost her debut singles match against World No. 84 Rebecca Marino in three sets. Krunić played the final doubles match with Bojana Jovanovski, beating Fichman and Pelletier 7–6, 6–4 to guarantee Serbia the spot in the World Group Play Offs. Serbia won that tie 3–2 against Slovakia, after Krunić and Janković beat Hantuchová and Rybáriková in three sets, 2–6, 7–5, 9–7, rallying from 2–6, 1–5. After this win, Serbia qualified for the 2012 Fed Cup World Group.
In May 2011, Krunić qualified for the ITF tournament Sparta Prague Open. She reached the semifinals where she lost to World No. 10 Petra Kvitová 6–4, 6–2, subsequently reaching her career-high ranking of World No. 208 on 16 May. At Grand Slams, Wimbledon and US Open, she lost in qualifying. Krunić qualified for her first WTA singles event in Budapest. She was leading in the first round match against Nina Bratchikova 7–5, 1–0, in the first round, when Bratchikova retired. Krunić lost her following match to the third seed Klára Zakopalová 7–5, 7–5. She played in Tashkent and after qualifications, Krunić won her second WTA professional match, losing just one game to Kamila Farhad. In second round she lost to Sorana Cîrstea in tight two sets.
At 2012 Australian Open Krunić fell to qualify losing to Lesia Tsurenko in final round. In February 2012, she was a part of Serbian Fed Cup team. She lost in singles to Yanina Wickmayer, but won in doubles with Bojana Jovanovski to claim a historic victory for Serbia. In 2012 on ITF circuit, Krunić won one title and lost one final in both singles and doubles. At next Grand Slams she failed to qualify. In Baku Krunić reached first WTA main draw of season and finished as a quarterfinalist for the first time. She beat fourth seed Andrea Hlaváčková and in second round Laura Pous Tió, but lost in three sets to eventual champion Bojana Jovanovski.
Krunić started the season playing at the Australian Open qualifying, losing to Maria Elena Camerin with 9–7 in third set. At WTA events in Bogotá and Acapulco Krunić tried to qualify but didn't manage. In Irapuato, Mexico, Krunić beat Olga Savchuk for first ITF title of the year and seventh overall, dropping no set the entire tournament. On clay season, she played four ITF tournaments and best result was in Trnava, Slovakia, when she went to semifinal. There she beat top 100 player and first seed Jana Čepelová in first round, but Barbora Záhlavová-Strýcová was better in two sets in semifinal. At French Open she lost to Mariana Duque Marino in second qualifying round, although she won second set 6–1.
After missing Wimbledon, Krunić played in WTA events Budapest and Baku without qualifications. In Baku she was the only player who won a set against eventual champion Elina Svitolina. In doubles in Baku, Krunić played alongside Eleni Daniilidou, and went to first WTA doubles final. In final they lost in three sets. US Open was the first Grand Slam tournament where she qualified for the main draw – she beat Carina Witthöft, Daria Gavrilova and Louisa Chirico to do it, all in two sets. But in first round great server Coco Vandeweghe was better in two sets 6–4, 7–6. Week after US Open, she played an ITF in Trabzon, Turkey, and won her last ITF title of a season, beating Stéphanie Foretz Gacon in the final. In WTA events Linz and Luxembourg she played qualifications. In Linz she qualified, but lost to lucky loser Maryna Zanevska in three sets. In doubles, Krunić won three ITF titles and lost in two finals during the season.
In first round of qualifications at the Australian Open, Krunić lost to Zarina Diyas in three sets. In January 2014, Krunić qualified for the PTT Pattaya Open, but lost to Nicha Lertpitaksinchai 6–3, 6–3 in the first round. Next she played three ITFs and best result was quarterfinal, where she lost to Timea Bacsinszky. In WTA event in Katowice, Krunić didn't qualify for main draw, but at least she beat former top 30 player Tamira Paszek. In Kuala Lumpur she didn't need qualifications, but in first round she lost to Karolína Plíšková in two sets. On clay, she made it to the semifinal at two ITF tournaments. At French Open and Wimbledon she failed to qualify. In Bucharest, Romania, she played WTA event. In first round she beat Alexandra Panova, but in second round she lost to world No. 3 and domestic player Simona Halep in a match full of breaks. Last prepare for US Open was in an ITF in Poland. There she lost in early round of singles, but won doubles title alongside Barbora Krejčíková.
At the 2014 US Open Krunić started campaign in qualifications. As it was last year at US Open, Krunić again qualified at the same Grand Slam tournament for her second main draw appearance. She beat Petra Martić, Denisa Allertova and tenth seed of qualifications Kateřina Siniaková to qualify. In that final round against Siniakova, Krunić won 7–5, 0–6, 6–0. In the first round of the main draw she played against good friend Katarzyna Piter and won her first ever main draw match at a Grand Slam, in two sets. In the second round, 27th seed Madison Keys awaited. Although they finished the match with the same amount of points, Krunić won in three sets. Next she faced third seed and reigning Wimbledon champion Petra Kvitová in the third round. And Krunić's fairytale run continued – she won 6–4, 6–4. With that win, she was guaranteed a world ranking in the top 100 for the first time. In the round of 16 Krunić lost to sixteenth seed and two time US Open finalist Victoria Azarenka, 6–4, 4–6, 4–6. Eighteen time Grand Slam champion, Martina Navratilova, said of Krunić during the match "what a find she is, what an athlete". During the tournament, Krunić's compatriots Jelena Janković, Ana Ivanovic and Bojana Jovanovski gave her advice and support. She was nominated a "Rising star of the month", but Belinda Bencic had more votes by 5%. Also, match against Azarenka was one of ten matches nominated for Grand Slam match of the year award.
The Asian swing started for Krunić in Tashkent. Despite losing to Lesia Tsurenko in the first round of singles, Krunić managed to capture her first WTA title playing doubles alongside Kateřina Siniaková. They beat all opponents in three sets en route to the final, where they declassed Russians Margarita Gasparyan and Alexandra Panova 6–2, 6–1. In her hometown, Moscow, she beat Caroline Garcia, but lost to Tsvetana Pironkova in second round. In doubles, Krunić and Siniakova beat 1st seeds and top ten players Makarova and Vesnina in first round.
Prior to the 2015 season, Krunić won an ITF in Ankara in late December as a top seed, saving a few match points en route. At first event in Shenzhen, Krunić qualified and then in second round won thrilling match against Anna Schmiedlova, rallying from 3–6, 2–5 and saving match points. In quarterfinal, eventual champion Simona Halep was better in straight sets. At Australian Open Krunić played first Grand Slam without qualifying, and was beaten in first round by Lauren Davis. She beat Schmiedlova in Acapulco again, but lost her next four matches on hard court. In Prague on clay, she upset Mirjana Lučić-Baroni, but lost narrowly to Yanina Wickmayer. At French Open she lost to Yulia Putintseva despite winning first set.
Krunić started grass season playing in Birmingham, where she qualified for main draw and beat Heather Watson in first round, but lost next to Svetlana Kuznetsova. She then had best result of the year in terms of importance, as she reached third round of Wimbledon with wins over nineteenth seed Sara Errani and former world no. 11 Roberta Vinci. She lost to Venus Williams in straight sets.
Krunić returned to clay playing in Bucharest where she reached quarterfinals. She beat Elizaveta Kulichkova and Vinci again, losing just two games, but lost to Polona Hercog. However, she didn't win a match at her next six tournaments, including US Open loss to Danka Kovinic. She also played doubles alongside Jelena Janković and they reached third round but somehow lost match for quarterfinal against fourth seeds Dellacqua and Shvedova, as they led 6–2, 4–2 and also had 4–2 in third set.
She won first match since six-match losing streak in Taskent, beating Anett Kontaveit who reached US Open fourth round, but lost to compatriot Bojana Jovanovski. At next tournament she won five matches to reach third quarterfinal of the year in Linz. First she won three qualifying rounds, including win over Kaia Kanepi, and beat then Roberta Vinci for the third time in only five months, and then Mona Barthel. This time win over Vinci was even more significant then last time, as she reached US Open final after famous win over Serena Williams. Krunić then lost to eventual champion Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. She played at next event in Moscow but lost ultimatelly to Lesia Tsurenko.
Krunić set a new career-high ranking at 62 in July, but however finished year at 96.
2007 — Tennis Europe Silver Medal for Player of the Year U–14
2012 – Serbian Women's Team of The Year (as part of Serbia Fed Cup team)
Serbia Fed Cup team
