Yuji Ide (井出 有治, Ide Yūji) (born 21 January 1975) is a Japanese professional racing driver who graduated from 2005 Formula Nippon to Formula One with the Super Aguri team in 2006, but lost his FIA Super Licence during the season due to erratic driving.
Ide returned to the Formula Nippon series after his four-race F1 stint and now races with the Autobacs Racing Team Aguri team.
Born in Saitama, Saitama, Ide started his racing career in 1990 with kart racing. In 1991, he won the Kantou National Cup Kart Championship. In 1992 he was second in the Regional Kart Championship East Kantou series A1 Class and also won the Japan Kart Grand Prix SS stock class National GP. The following year he joined the All- Japan Kart Championship Series Formula A Class before progressing to the All-Japan Formula Three Championship.
In 1999 he came second in the All Japan GT Championship GT300 Class Series. He was also the Formula Dream series champion in Japan. In 2002 Ide joined the French Formula Three Championship series and finished in seventh place. The following year, 2003, he joined the All Japan Championship Formula Nippon Series and also finished seventh. In 2004, he claimed third spot before going on to win the Super Endurance Race Class 3 Series. He finished his first stint in Formula Nippon finishing second in the 2005 championship.
At age 31, Ide became one of Formula One's older rookies when he landed a seat at Super Aguri for the 2006 season, in part due to Super Aguri's aspiration of fielding an all-Japanese team. Ide had known Aguri Suzuki for a long time, according to a press release, however Ide's meshing with the team had some issues with his lack of proficient English.
In his debut race in Bahrain, Ide was significantly behind his more experienced teammate Takuma Sato and failed to finish. At the next race in Malaysia, he retired after 33 laps.
The third race of the 2006 season went poorly for Ide: He was blamed for blocking Rubens Barrichello during his qualifying lap, causing the Brazilian to be stuck in the first round of qualifying and start 16th on the grid. Ide finished in Australia, two laps down. His weekend in Melbourne was notable for a number of spins, and team principal Aguri Suzuki subsequently suggested Ide's seat was not safe if his performances did not improve.
At Imola, Ide caused a first lap crash with Christijan Albers that put the Dutchman into a series of rolls which ended with Albers' car upside down. Ide was reprimanded by the stewards and warned over future conduct. Aguri Suzuki said "He didn't have enough testing because he doesn't understand how to use the car".
On May 4, 2006, Super Aguri announced that following advice from the FIA, Ide would be dropped from the upcoming European Grand Prix at the Nürburgring, being replaced by former Renault test driver Franck Montagny. Ide was demoted to Montagny's seat as test driver.
On May 10, 2006, the FIA revoked Ide's FIA Super Licence meaning he could no longer compete in F1 during the 2006 season. Super Aguri remained committed to getting Ide back into F1 until their withdrawal from Formula One.
Overall during Ide's four-race F1 career, he finished once — a 13th place at the 2006 Australian Grand Prix. His best qualifying effort was 21st of 22 cars at his debut at Bahrain, where the 22nd starter, Kimi Räikkönen, did not complete a qualifying attempt.
In the November 2009 issue of F1 Racing Magazine, Ide was named as one of the five worst F1 drivers in history.
In July 2006 it was announced that Ide would be racing for Team Dandelion Racing in the final six rounds of the Formula Nippon championship, with the aim of increasing his racing experience.
In 2007, he has remained in Formula Nippon with the Autobacs Racing Team Aguri team, which is owned by Aguri Suzuki. His best finish of the season is a third place, scored in round five at Suzuka.
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
(key)
