The Hungarian national basketball team is the basketball team that represents Hungary in international competitions.
EuroBasket 1946 –  Bronze medal
EuroBasket 1953 –  Silver medal
EuroBasket 1955 –  Champions
The Hungarian side came in ninth place at the first European basketball championship, the EuroBasket 1935 held by the International Basketball Federation's FIBA Europe continental federation. They faced eventual champions Latvia in the preliminary round, falling 46–12. In the classification matches, the Hungarians lost to Bulgaria then defeated Romania to finish ninth with a 1–2 record.
After not competing in the 1937 edition, the Hungarians returned to EuroBasket 1939. Once again, they finished in next-to-last place, losing to every team except the Finland team. Their 1–6 record placed them seventh in the eight team field.
The next European competition was the EuroBasket 1946. Hungary placed second in their preliminary round group of four, losing to Italy but defeating Luxembourg and Poland. This qualified the Hungarians for the semifinals, which they lost to Czechoslovakia. In the bronze medal match, the Hungarians defeated France, 38–32.
Hungary competed at EuroBasket 1947 the next year. Their 1–1 record in the preliminary round was sufficient for them to advance to the semifinal groups; however, they lost all three games there. In the 7th/8th place classification match, they defeated Bulgaria 59–29 to finish seventh of the fourteen teams.
Hungary's next appearance, at EuroBasket 1953 in Moscow, resulted in the team's second EuroBasket medal. Their preliminary group included hosts and defending champions Soviet Union, who gave Hungary their only loss in the pool. Their 2–1 record put Hungary in second in the pool and advanced them to the final round. There, they lost again to the Soviets as well as fellow perennial powers Czechoslovakia and France. Hungary beat the other four teams in the round, however, and their 4–3 record put them in a tie with Czechoslovakia, France, and Israel. The Hungarians came out on top of the tie-breaker, finishing an overall second place behind Soviet Union to take the silver medal.
The next tournament, EuroBasket 1955, was hosted by Hungary in Budapest. The results of the preliminary round were hardly surprising for the Hungarians, as they won all three of their games to proceed to the final round. Their first game in that round was against Czechoslovakia, and the Hungarians quickly found themselves in the bottom half of the final round group with a 75–65 loss. Their next four games, however, were much different and Hungary defeated Poland, Italy, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia to rise to 4–1. This put them in a tie for the lead of the group with the Soviet Union, who had also lost to Czechoslovakia.
In a game that was never particularly close, the Hungarians handed the Soviets only their second loss, 82–68, in 34 games and 4 EuroBasket tournaments. Hungary advanced to 5–1, in sole lead of the pool, which they never relinquished as they defeated Romania to finish at 6–1 with the gold medal.
After a narrow victory over Romania in the preliminary round of EuroBasket 1957, the Hungarians cruised to a 3–0 record in the round to advance to the final round. There, they lost in turn to each of the other three preliminary pool winners, finishing at 4–3 in the round to take 4th place overall.
This was the preliminary rooster for FIBA EuroBasket 2013 qualification.
1935 EuroBasket: finished 9th among 10 teams
Ferenc Velkei, Zoltan Csanyi, Ferenc Kolozs, Sandor Nagy, Laszlo Rozsa, Istvan Szamosi, Emil Kozma, Tibor Lehel, Sandor Lelkes, Zoltan Szunyogh (Coach: Istvan Kiraly)
1939 EuroBasket: finished 7th among 8 teams
Ferenc Velkei, Zoltan Csanyi, Istvan Szamosi, Sandor Csanyi, Janos Szabo, Geza Bajari, Geza Kardos, Aba Szathmary, Janos Gyimesi, Gyula Stolpa (Coach: Istvan Kiraly)
1946 EuroBasket: finished 3rd among 10 teams
Ferenc Nemeth, Tibor Mezőfi, Ferenc Velkei, Geza Kardos, Gyorgy Nagy, Laszlo Kiralyhidi, Geza Racz, Ede Vadászi, Geza Bajari, Antal Bankuti (Coach: Istvan Kiraly)
1947 EuroBasket: finished 7th among 14 teams
Ferenc Nemeth, Tibor Mezőfi, Geza Bajari, Istvan Timar, Ede Vadászi, Gyula Toth, Geza Kardos, Ervin Kassai, Bela Bankuti, Laszlo Kiralyhidi, Laszlo Nadasdy, Antal Bankuti (Coach: Istvan Kiraly)
1948 Olympic Games: finished 16th among 23 teams
Tibor Mezőfi, Gyorgy Nagy, Tibor Zsíros, Geza Kardos, Jozsef Kozma, Istvan Timar, Attila Timar, Janos Halasz, Istvan Lovrics, Ede Vadászi, Antal Bankuti, Laszlo Novakovszky
1952 Olympic Games: finished 16th among 23 teams
János Greminger, Tibor Mezőfi, Tibor Zsíros, László Hódi, Laszlo Banhegyi, Pál Bogár, János Simon, Tibor Cselkó, Peter Papp, Tibor Czinkán, Gyorgy Bokor, Ede Komáromi, Gyorgy Telegdy
1953 EuroBasket: finished 2nd among 17 teams
János Greminger, Tibor Mezőfi, László Hódi, Janos Hodi, Tibor Zsíros, Laszlo Banhegyi, János Simon, Tibor Cselkó, Tibor Remai, Peter Papp, Tibor Czinkán, Pál Bogár, Gyorgy Bokor, Ede Komáromi (Coach: Janos Pader)
1955 EuroBasket: finished 1st among 18 teams
János Greminger, Tibor Mezőfi, Laszlo Toth, Janos Hodi, Tibor Czinkán, Janos Dallos, Tibor Zsíros, Laszlo Banhegyi, Janos Bencze, László Hódi, Peter Papp, Pál Bogár, Tibor Cselkó, János Simon (Coach: Janos Pader)
1957 EuroBasket: finished 4th among 16 teams
János Greminger, Laszlo Toth, Tibor Zsíros, Laszlo Gabanyi, Laszlo Banhegyi, János Simon, Istvan Liptai, Tibor Czinkán, Janos Bencze, Pal Borbely, Zoltan Judik, Ervin Keszey, Istvan Sahin-Toth (Coach: Zoltan Csanyi)
1959 EuroBasket: finished 4th among 17 teams
János Greminger, Tibor Zsíros, Laszlo Gabanyi, Tibor Czinkán, János Simon, Laszlo Banhegyi, Arpad Glatz, Janos Bencze, Otto Temesvari, Zoltan Judik, Miklos Bohaty, Merenyi (Coach: Janos Pader)
1960 Olympic Games: finished 9th among 16 teams
János Greminger, Tibor Zsíros, Laszlo Banhegyi, János Simon, Laszlo Gabanyi, Istvan Liptai, Arpad Glatz, Otto Temesvari, Janos Bencze, Gyorgy Polik, Zoltan Judik, Miklos Bohaty (Coach: Janos Pader)
1961 EuroBasket: finished 6th among 19 teams
Laszlo Gabanyi, Janos Bencze, Istvan Liptai, Otto Temesvari, Istvan Sahin-Toth, Gabor Kulcsar, Geza Gyulai, Gyorgy Polik, Janos Tuboly, Miklos Bohaty, Jozsef Kovacs, Valer Banna (Coach: Janos Pader)
1963 EuroBasket: finished 4th among 16 teams
János Greminger, János Simon, Laszlo Gabanyi, Janos Bencze, Otto Temesvari, Arpad Glatz, Pal Koczka, Gyorgy Polik, Tibor Kangyal, Gyorgy Vajdovics, Jozsef Prieszol, Miklos Bohaty (Coach: Tibor Zsíros)
1964 Olympic Games: finished 13th among 16 teams
János Greminger, Laszlo Gabanyi, Janos Bencze, Arpad Glatz, Tibor Kangyal, Gyorgy Polik, Miklos Bohaty, Janos Racz, Andras Haan, Jozsef Prieszol, Pal Koczka, Odon Lendvay (Coach: Tibor Zsíros)
1965 EuroBasket: finished 15th among 16 teams
Gyorgy Polik, Janos Racz, Matyas Ranky, Jozsef Toth, Pal Koczka, Laszlo Koranyi, Odon Lendvay, Laszlo Orbay, Istvan Fekete, Ferenc Haris, Valer Banna, Gabor Kulcsar (Coach: Tibor Zsíros)
1967 EuroBasket: finished 13th among 16 teams
Imre Nyitrai, Laszlo Gabanyi, Tibor Kangyal, Gyorgy Polik, Jozsef Prieszol, Valer Banna, Laszlo Orbay, Laszlo Koranyi, Jozsef Kovacs, Istvan Halmos, Odon Lendvay, Gabor Kulcsar (Coach: Janos Szabo)
1969 EuroBasket: finished 8th among 12 teams
Laszlo Gabanyi, Jozsef Kovacs, Istvan Banhegyi, Jozsef Prieszol, Valer Banna, Laszlo Orbay, Szabolcs Hody, Istvan Hegedus, Odon Lendvay, Istvan Gyurasits, Tamas Palffy, Sandor Geller (Coach: Rezso Eszeki)
1999 EuroBasket: finished 14th among 16 teams
Kornél Dávid, Robert Gulyas, István Németh, Laszlo Czigler, Laszlo Kalman, Rolland Halm, Erno Sitku, Tibor Pankar, Tamas Bencze, Zoltan Boros, Laszlo Orosz, Zalan Meszaros (Coach: Lajos Meszaros)
