Miloš Pavlović (Serbian Cyrillic: Милош Павловић; born 8 October 1982 in Belgrade) is a professional race car driver.
Miloš's racing story started during the summer of 1991. One year later he became double champion of Yugoslavia in karting. He went in 1993 to Italy, where in his very first season, Miloš became regional champion of Italy, reached second place in the Winter Cup and was very successful in a dozen other races.
Excellent drives and wins in international races in 1994 definitively confirmed a supreme talent. He became vice-champion of Europe in Portugal (Braga), and he came third in the World Championship in Italy (Ugento).
That same year he was elected as the best driver of Yugoslavia.
Miloš achieved real international fame with the greatest success in his karting career in 1996, when he became the youngest-ever winner of the World Cup, the "Ayrton Senna Trophy”.
As a world champion he received an invitation from the International Automobile Federation (FIA) to take part in a karting race in the Bercy hall in Paris, in which the best kart racers of the year compete against Formula 1 drivers.
In 2003, he was given a special prize for personal contribution to the development of the sport of karting, "Karting History Makers", by the CIK-FIA, karting’s governing body.
During 1997, he tested in various formulas and completed the Jim Russell Racing Drivers School in Formula Vauxhall in England. He won a race at Donington Park and began a new phase in his career.
In 1998, Pavlović decided to compete in the Formula Vauxhall Junior Championship in Britain. However, lack of finance meant that he took part in 12 out of the 16 races in the season. In this, the toughest junior championship of its kind in the world, he finished with an overall placing of tenth. He recorded results of from fourth to eighth place.
In 1999, Miloš decided to drive again in Formula Vauxhall championship in Britain, which in the meantime had lost the epithet "Junior". He achieved two pole positions, two wins and three podium finishes. He lost the championship title when his gearbox failed at Thruxton. This was the only race in the championship which Miloš did not finish and in which he failed to gain a single point. At the end of the season he took overall fourth place in the championship, with 109 points.
He moved up to Formula 3 in 2000, taking part in the British championship. Unfortunately, because of wrong decisions by his then management, he had to drive with a team which was making its debut in the championship. The team did not succeed in providing Miloš with a correct “package” in any of the race meetings. In five out of the thirteen events, he did not finish because of mechanical failures. But even in these conditions, Miloš succeeded in winning 41 points and finishing eleventh overall in the championship.
In addition to 14 races in Great Britain, he took part in four internationals: the Eurocup Grand Prix in Pau (France), the Marlboro Masters in Zandvoort (Netherlands), the Macau Grand Prix (Macau), the Korea Super Prix' (South Korea). In the Eurocup, he finished seventh.
In 2002, Miloš’s biggest issue was finance. He therefore decided to move from Britain to Italy to compete in the Italian Formula 3 championship. For the first time since racing in single seaters, he had the chance to drive with a good team - Target Racing, which was able to supply him with everything necessary to fight for the championship. Miloš thus went on to win the championship title convincingly: he had 5 pole positions, 5 wins and 3 second places.
Thanks to this result, he gained the right to a "super licence", which is required for those who wish to take part in the FIA Formula One Championship. He was the first ever driver from Eastern Europe to gain this right.
In 2003 Miloš wanted to compete in the International Formula 3000 championship. However, due to lack of finance, he was forced to look elsewhere. Michel Lecomte, owner of the French team Epsilon by Graff, offered him the opportunity of competing in the newly born championship "World Series Light", which was sponsored by Nissan. He finished third overall, and was one of contenders for the championship title right up to the very end of the season.
In 2004 Miloš added another title to his CV. Together with the Vergani Formula team he won the World Series Light Championship, scoring 9 pole positions, 7 wins, 7 fastest laps in the race, 9 podium finishes and 2 hat-tricks. After such a fantastic season and the championship title in the World Series Light category, the only logical step for Miloš was to continue his career in the World Series 3.5 championship.
Thanks to the prize money from his victory in the World Series Light championship, Miloš managed finally in 2005 to step into a “3000 cc” category, also called the World Series by Renault Championship. Unfortunately that prize together with his sponsorship were not enough to secure a good drive. This problem was to be a constant issue for Miloš during this and the following 2006 season. However, in spite of this, he managed during these two difficult seasons to score 3 podium finishes, 1 pole position and 1 fastest lap in the race.
In 2007, eventually getting conditions closer to his abilities, Miloš blew his full potential maintaining options for podium finish in every weekend. He stepped on top of the podium twice during the season, equaling the best qualified in victories. By the last race he had options in improving final results, finishing second or winning the championship. Miloš scored 96 points during his last season in this category.
In 2008 Miloš moved into the GP2 Series despite the fact that he was forced by circumstances to join a team which had finished last in the previous season’s championship standings. However, he completed the GP2 Asia championship with results that showed his great potential. After GP2 Asia, he moved into the GP2 Main Series but decided to withdraw after taking part in only two events (Barcelona and Istanbul) due to a complete lack of team-based competitivity.
For 2009, Miloš moved into the FIA Formula Two Championship, driving car number 25. Miloš finished in ninth place overall with two podiums despite the fact that he was a front runner throughout the whole year. The reason he didn't score race wins or ended up among the top in the standings was simply down to the fact that he suffered most car failures throughout the season (seven retirements in total due to technical issues).
Throughout 2011 and 2012, Miloš raced in the FIA GT1 World Championship. Both seasons he was driving the legendary Ford GT40, first with Belgian Racing team and then with Sunred Engineering.
In 2014, Miloš joined the Italian racing team Bonaldi Motorsport. He shared the car n.3 with the Italian driver Edoardo Piscopo in both European and World Championships. Together they formed a due which went on to win both the European and the World championships in the PRO Class. Throughout the season they scored a total of 1 pole position, 5 race wins, 6 second, 1 third place and 4 fastest laps in the race.
This is the first time in history of the Super Trofeo that a car not driven by a single driver wins the title making their achievement even more precious.
Thanks to the double championship win in a single season, both Milos and Edoardo were promoted to the role of official Lamborghini factory drivers.
2015 Lamborghini Squadra Corse - various races and GT3 testing
2014 Champion - European and World Champion - Lamborghini Blancpain Super Trofeo Championship (1 pole position, 5 wins, 6 second and 1 third place)
2013 Porsche Carrera Cup Italia
2012 Part season in the FIA GT1 World Championship
2011 Part season in the FIA GT1 World Championship
2009 9th place — FIA Formula 2 Championship (2 podium finishes and 1 fastest lap in the race)
2008 GP2 and GP2 Asia Series
2007 3rd place — World Series by Renault 3,5 Championship (2 wins, 2 podium finishes, 2 fastest laps in the race)
2006 World Series by Renault 3,5 Championship (got to Draco International by the end of the seazon)
2005 World Series by Renault Championship (1 podium)
2004 Champion - World Series Light Championship (9 pole positions, 7 wins, 3 podium finishes and 7 fastest laps in the race)
2003 3rd place — World Series Light Championship (1 pole position, 6 podium finishes and 3 fastest laps in the race)
2002 Champion - Italian Formula 3 Championship (5 pole positions, 5 wins, 3 podium finishes and 4 fastest laps in the race)
2000 7th place — European Formula 3 Cup, 11th place — British Formula 3 Championship
1999 4th place — British Formula Vauxhall Championship (2 pole positions, 2 wins and 3 podium finishes)
1998 10th place — British Formula Vauxhall Junior Championship (Drove 12 of the 16 races)
1997 Winner of the final Formula Vauxhall Junior race at Donington
1996 Champion - Winner of the World Cup in Karting "The Ayrton Senna Trophy" (Formula A class)
1994 3rd place — World Championship in Karting (100 Junior class), 2nd place — European Championship in Karting (100 Junior class)
1993 Champion - Regional Championship of Italy in Karting (100 Junior class)
1992 Champion - Yugoslav National Championship in Karting (100 Junior Class), Champion - Yugoslav National Championship in Karting (Mini Kart)
1991 Debuted in the Yugoslav Karting Championship
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)
* Season still in progress.
