Nicklas Bendtner (Danish pronunciation: [neɡ̊las ˈb̥ɛnˀd̥nɐ]; born 16 January 1988) is a Danish footballer who plays for the Denmark national team. His preferred position is centre forward, but he has also played on the right side of attack, and possesses a powerful header.
Having progressed through the youth ranks at Tårnby Boldklub, Kjøbenhavns Boldklub and Arsenal, Bendtner signed his first professional contract with Arsenal in 2005. He made his professional debut in October 2005 in the Football League Cup, in a game against Sunderland. For the 2006–07 season, Bendtner was loaned out to Championship side Birmingham City, where he made 48 appearances. Following his return to Arsenal, he became a regular first team player, but began to slip out of favour during the 2010–11 season. As a result, he moved on loan to Premier League side Sunderland for the majority of the 2011–12 season, where he made 30 appearances. He then spent the entire 2012–13 season on loan to Serie A side Juventus, where he made 10 appearances, but failed to score. Bendtner was released by Arsenal in 2014. He subsequently joined VfL Wolfsburg on a free transfer, and was released in 2016.
Bendtner has played internationally for Denmark at under-16, under-17, under-19, under-21 and senior levels. He made his senior international debut on 16 August 2006, in a friendly match against Poland, and scored his first international goal in that match. Since then, he has been capped 72 times, scoring 29 goals. He has also featured in Denmark's 2010 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2012 squads.
Born in Copenhagen, as a child, Bendtner played football for Tårnby Boldklub before joining F.C. Copenhagen's feeder club Kjøbenhavns Boldklub (KB) in 1998. He scored four goals in six Danish national youth team matches, before joining English club Arsenal in the summer of 2004.
Bendtner formed a prolific strike partnership in the Arsenal reserves, with teammate Arturo Lupoli. His first-team debut for Arsenal came on 25 October 2005, in a League Cup match against Sunderland at the Stadium of Light, as a substitute for Quincy Owusu-Abeyie in the final minutes.
Bendtner was loaned out to Championship team Birmingham City in August 2006 to gain first team experience, with the loan initially lasting until January 2007. Bendtner made his debut for Birmingham, as a substitute for Stephen Clemence, in the game against Colchester United on 5 August 2006. He played the final half-hour, scoring the winning goal. The loan at Birmingham was extended until the end of the 2006–07 season.
Bendtner signed a new five-year contract with Arsenal in May 2007, and returned to the club for the 2007–08 Premier League season. After impressing at Birmingham, the teenage striker was presented with opportunities to seek first team football elsewhere, with reports that Olympique Lyonnais and Milan wanting the promising teenager, but he stayed on in order to earn his place in the starting eleven.
In his first match at the Emirates Stadium, a friendly against Paris Saint-Germain in the inaugural pre-season Emirates Cup tournament, Bendtner scored a goal and assisted in another by Mathieu Flamini. His first competitive strike for the Gunners was the game-winning goal in a 2–0 result versus Newcastle United on 25 September 2007 during a League Cup match. On 23 October, he scored his debut UEFA Champions League goal in the 89th minute against Slavia Prague just over 20 minutes after coming on as a substitute, finishing off a back-heeled pass from Emmanuel Eboué to complete the 7–0 thrashing.
His first Premier League start came at Everton on 29 December 2007 but he was eventually sent off for two bookable offences. After suspension, Bendtner scored his first FA Cup goal against Burnley on 6 January 2008 as Arsenal won 2–0.
Bendtner's first Premier League goal came on 22 December 2007 in a 2–1 Arsenal victory against Tottenham Hotspur at the Emirates Stadium. He headed the winning goal from a Cesc Fàbregas corner just 1.8 seconds (official time) after coming on as a substitute for Emmanuel Eboué, breaking the previous record.
During the season, manager Arsène Wenger tried to partner Bendtner with Emmanuel Adebayor whenever Robin van Persie was rested. Bendtner and Adebayor, however, did not get along well. It became apparent during the 2008 League Cup semi-final second leg away at Tottenham when the pair had a heated on-pitch altercation with the scoreline at 4–1 to Tottenham and referee Howard Webb, captain William Gallas, and other teammates had to intervene and separate the two. Adebayor later apologized on Arsenal's website and The Football Association declined to take any formal action against the duo.
Bendtner also scored a last minute equaliser against Aston Villa to keep Arsenal top of the table.
The main highlight of Bendtner's pre-season was scoring four goals in the first-half of Arsenal's 10–2 victory against Burgenland XI on 29 July 2008. He scored his first Premier League goal of the 2008–09 season against Bolton Wanderers and got an assist for Emmanuel Eboué to score all in the space of one minute.
He had a hard time in October and November, but on 25 November, he scored a controversial 87th-minute winner against Dynamo Kyiv in the Champions League to ensure Arsenal progressed to the knockout stages. After treatment to an injured player, with Kyiv apparently expecting the ball to be returned to them, Cesc Fàbregas hit the ball forward and Bendtner scored with a left-footed shot. He was booked for removing his shirt in celebration. In January, he scored two more goals as a substitute, late winners at home to Bolton and Hull City, both from Robin van Persie crosses.
On 24 February, he was goaded after missing a number of chances in the 1–0 win over Roma in the knockout stages. The following week, Bendtner scored two goals at West Bromwich Albion, as Arsenal won 3–1 away from home. The fans were much more supportive towards him when he missed a string of chances against Blackburn. Arsenal still won 4–0, thanks to Andrei Arshavin's stunner, and a brace from Eboué. Bendtner got a goal in a 3–1 win at Newcastle United, a header from a long free-kick.
On 5 May 2009, the 21-year-old was controversially seen leaving a night club hours after Arsenal's 3–1 home defeat by Manchester United in the Champions League semi-final. Bendtner was pictured with his belt undone and jeans pulled down. He later said that "I may be young, but my actions were a poor error of judgment and something I deeply regret." Bendtner was a second-half substitute for Arsenal, who lost 4–1 on aggregate to defending champions United. Bendtner made amends with a goal, albeit a consolation, in a 4–1 defeat to Chelsea.
Bendtner started the new season by announcing a change in his Arsenal squad number for the 2009–10 season. "Before the season starts, I wanted to change my squad number from 26, which I've obviously had for a number of seasons. I chose to move to 52 because it's a special number to me personally, and I hope that it brings me good luck for the new season. I appreciate that a good number of fans have bought their kits for 2009–10 already with names and numbers printed up so I'd like to personally cover the cost of replacing anyone's shirt that has my previous number. It means a lot to see supporters wearing your name and number, and I want to ensure people aren't inconvenienced by the change."
On 16 September, Bendtner scored his first goal of the season in the Champions League group stage in a 3–2 away win against Standard Liège. On the morning of 27 September, he was involved in a car accident while driving along the A1. He suffered cuts to his knees and shoulder pain as well as writing off his Aston Martin. He then missed Arsenal's Champions League tie with Olympiakos, which Arsenal won 2–0. He returned on 4 October 2009 and scored his first league goal of the season in Arsenal's 6–2 win over Blackburn Rovers. On 28 October, he scored the winning goal in the League Cup in a 2–1 win against Liverpool.
On 10 November, Bendtner underwent groin surgery in Germany after aggravating a groin injury in the 3–0 win on 31 October playing against Tottenham Hotspur. He was expected to be out for up to four weeks, but returned on 27 January in a 0–0 draw at Villa Park. He started his first match after recovering from his injury and played 82 minutes in Arsenal's victory over Liverpool on 10 February to complete his return to full fitness. Ten days later, he scored his first league goal since October with the opener in a 2–0 home defeat of Sunderland. He followed this up with the equalising goal in an eventual 3–1 win against Stoke City at the Britannia Stadium on 27 February.
On 9 March, Bendtner scored his first hat-trick of his professional career in a 5–0 victory over FC Porto in the second leg of the Champions League first knockout round to overturn their 2–1 loss in the first leg. On 13 March, Bendtner scored a stoppage time winning goal against Hull City to put the Gunners level on points with Chelsea at the top of the Premier League. Another stoppage time winner followed in the 1–0 victory over Wolverhampton Wanderers on 3 April.
At the start of April, it was announced that Bendtner had won the Arsenal Player of the Month award for his performances in March, taking over 33% of the votes. He also scored the only goal for Arsenal in a 4–1 defeat to FC Barcelona at Camp Nou as they were knocked out of the Champions League in the quarter-final on 6 April.
After sustaining an injury during the 2010 FIFA World Cup, and spending almost four months out of action, Bendtner's first game of the season for Arsenal came in a substitute appearance against Birmingham City on 16 October. On 24 October, he scored his first goal of the season in a 3–0 away win against Manchester City. Three days later, he scored again in a match against Newcastle United in the League Cup at St James' Park, as Arsenal won 4–0. He scored his first goal of 2011 on 25 January against Ipswich Town in the League Cup, to level the aggregate score at 1–1. Arsenal later went on to win the game 3–0, and 3–1 on aggregate. The Ipswich goal also won him the Arsenal Goal of the Month award for January On 2 March 2011, Bendtner scored a hat-trick in the FA Cup fifth round replay against League One side Leyton Orient, his first for nearly a year, and the first by an Arsenal player in an FA Cup game since Ian Wright's against Yeovil Town in 1993.
Bendtner was left out of Arsenal's 2011 summer tour of Asia whilst talks took place over a transfer. Amid reports of interest from Stoke City and Borussia Dortmund as well as confirmed interest from Hamburger SV sporting director Frank Arnesen, Bendtner made his desire to leave Arsenal public in August 2011, citing the need for first-team football as motivation.
On the last day of the August 2011 transfer window, Premier League club Sunderland completed a one-year loan deal for Bendtner, with the striker linking up again with manager Steve Bruce. Bendtner has said that he will never play for Arsenal again due to a lack of chances in the first team since his car accident. On his debut, he made an assist against Chelsea on 10 September 2011, with his first goal coming on 1 October 2011 against West Bromwich Albion in the 24th minute. He also made an assist in the same game for Ahmed Elmohamady's equaliser, with the match ending as a 2–2 draw. A goal scored by Bendtner was considered by the Premier League's Dubious Goals Committee. Bendtner saw a shot deflected in via a touch from Gareth McAuley in the 2–2 draw with West Brom on 1 October.
Bendtner's second goal for Sunderland came in injury time against Bolton Wanderers; the match ended 2–0 and was Sunderland's second win of the season. Bendtner scored his third goal for Sunderland in a 3–2 win at Queens Park Rangers. On 21 January 2012, Bendtner sustained a nose injury in Sunderland's 2–0 win over Swansea City since which he wears a mask covering his nose and eyes, and had to be substituted. Bendtner scored again in the Tyne-Wear Derby on 4 March, converting a penalty to put Sunderland 1–0 up. On 10 March, Bendtner scored against Liverpool, leading Sunderland to a 1–0 victory. A string of good performances resulted in Sunderland's 3–1 victory at home against QPR, a game which he scored the opening goal with a header 10 yards out as well as scoring Sunderland's second goal in their 3–3 draw away to Manchester City.
On the last day of the August 2012 transfer window, Bendtner joined Serie A club Juventus on loan for the season, with an option to make the move permanent. Bendtner made his debut for Juventus as a substitute for Fabio Quagliarella in a 2–0 win at the Juventus Stadium against Chievo on 22 September 2012. Bendtner made his first start on 28 October in a 1–0 win against Catania. He started the Coppa Italia game against Cagliari in December, but suffered a thigh injury that required surgery and was expected to be out for at least two months. Bendtner won the Scudetto with Juventus in the 2012–13 season, but failed to score a single league goal for the club. Juventus did not make the loan move permanent following the end of the 2012–13 season and Bendtner was returned to Arsenal.
On 22 September 2013, Bendtner was an unused substitute against Stoke City. On 25 September 2013, Bendtner made his return to Arsenal in a League Cup match against West Bromwich Albion. The match finished in a 1–1 draw as he assisted Thomas Eisfeld for the first goal, which was later cancelled out by Saido Berahino, leading to extra time and then to penalties. Bendtner played the whole 120 minutes and went on to score Arsenal's first penalty. Arsenal won 4–3 on penalties. On 4 December, against Hull City, Bendtner scored his first Arsenal goal since March 2011 with a header in the second minute. On 1 January 2014, Bendtner scored his last goal for Arsenal against Cardiff City in the 88th minute, injuring his ankle in the process before Theo Walcott sealed the game for a 2–0 Arsenal win. On 4 March 2014, Bendtner announced he would leave Arsenal at the end of the season when his contract at the club expired.
On 15 August 2014, Bendtner signed a three-year deal with VfL Wolfsburg of the Bundesliga. Managing director Klaus Allofs described him as “a striker at the best age, who already was able to gather a lot of international experience in his career, which did not always run in a straight line." 
His début for the German club came as a substitute against Eintracht Frankfurt in a match that finished 2–2.
On 6 November 2014, Bendtner scored his first two goals for Wolfsburg, netting from the penalty-spot and from open play in a 5–1 win against Krasnodar in the Europa League. Sixteen days later, he scored his first goal in the Bundesliga against Schalke 04 in a 3–2 away defeat. On 19 March 2015, he scored in the 89th minute of the second leg of the round of 16 in Europa League against Inter Milan.
Bendtner began his second season at Wolfsburg in the 2015 DFL-Supercup against Bayern Munich, where he equalised in the 89th minute from Kevin De Bruyne's cross to draw the game level at 1–1 and then scored the winner in the penalty shootout to clinch the trophy. On 8 August 2015, he continued his good form by scoring in a 4–1 win at Stuttgarter Kickers in the first round of the DFB-Pokal.
On 25 April 2016, Wolfsburg announced that Bendtner's contract, which had been valid until June 2017, had been terminated with immediate effect.
Bendtner started his national team career by scoring three goals in three starts for the Denmark under-16 national team in February 2004. He then scored six goals in 15 games for the Denmark under-17 national team, and was named 2004 Danish Under-17 Player of the Year.
Bendtner was the youngest player selected for the Danish under-21 national squad for the 2006 European Under-21 Championships. He replaced Morten Rasmussen in the Danish starting line-up. He made his under-21 debut on 17 May 2006, at the age of 18, scoring both goals in a Danish 2–0 victory over Spain in a friendly match. When Bendtner was substituted with Rasmussen during the game against the Netherlands, Bendtner told the press he found Rasmussen a lesser player. Bendtner was reprimanded, but played the rest of the tournament before Denmark were eliminated.
On 16 August 2006, Bendtner made his first senior appearance for Denmark, still only 18 years old, making him the seventh youngest player on the Danish senior national team ever. He was in the starting lineup for his debut game, a friendly match against Poland. He scored a goal after 30 minutes, helping Denmark to a 2–0 win. On 1 September 2006, he played his second national team game, and came on as a substitute in a friendly match against Portugal. He scored the final goal in a 4–2 win for Denmark. Although he still qualified to play for the U21s, Bendtner soon earned a spot in the starting line on the Danish national team scoring, two goals in UEFA Euro 2008 Qualifying.
In the 2010 World Cup qualifiers, Bendtner scored an 84th-minute 1–1 equaliser against Portugal, a match Denmark went on to win 3–2. He scored again against Portugal in the reverse fixture which ended 1–1. He then scored a header four days later against Albania. He assisted Jakob Poulsen's goal in Denmark's 1–0 win over Sweden, which meant they qualified for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. He ended the campaign with three goals. For his contribution, he was voted Danish Player of the Year and his goal against Portugal won the Goal of the Year award. Denmark coach Morten Olsen selected Bendtner for the 2010 World Cup squad in South Africa. Bendtner scored the equaliser in Denmark's World Cup group stage 2–1 win against Cameroon.
On 12 May 2011, Bendtner turned down the opportunity of representing his national team at the under-21 level at the European Championship, citing family reasons.
He scored two goals in a 2–0 win against Norway on 6 September 2011. On 7 October, Bendtner failed to score in a 4–1 win against Cyprus after several good chances. But four days later, he scored in the 63rd minute against Portugal to ensure Denmark qualified for Euro 2012. On 11 November, he scored against rivals Sweden in an international friendly. Four days later, Bendtner scored in the second half against Finland, racing away from the defence before finishing hard and low to put Denmark 2–1 up.
Bendtner was selected in the Denmark squad for Euro 2012. A Sports Illustrated preview described him as "tall and powerful, capable of acting as a target man, yet also has the technical gifts to play deeper or on the flank." On 13 June, he scored twice in Denmark's narrow 3–2 defeat to Portugal in the second group match. Bendtner revealed the logo of bookmakers Paddy Power on his underpants after scoring his second goal, for which UEFA banned him for one 2014 World Cup qualifying match and fined him €100,000. The company later gave Bendtner the money to pay the fine; this was a separate payment from the money he was initially paid. On 12 October 2012, he scored the equalising goal in a 1–1 draw against Bulgaria in a 2014 World Cup qualifying match. He played at Italy four days later, picking up a yellow card in the process.
In March 2013, the Danish Football Association suspended Bendtner from consideration for national team selection for six months after his arrest for drink driving. According to their statement: "The DBU have demanded that Nicklas Bendtner take six months off to think over his international future. The DBU respect the rights of all players to have a private life, but we also have certain rules that need to be met by international players in their public behaviour."
Bendtner returned to the international stage to play the return fixture against Italy, and scored both of Denmark's goals in a 2–2 draw. The ankle injury sustained while on club duty with Arsenal resulted in Bendtner being sidelined from international football until he was selected in the squad for a friendly against England at Wembley Stadium in March 2014. He was given a starting berth in this match, however was substituted off after 63 minutes.
In the first round of international call-ups since Bendtner's transfer to Wolfsburg, he was left out of the Denmark squad by Martin Olsen, who elected to name Martin Braithwaite as his sole striker for a friendly against Turkey and a UEFA Euro 2016 qualifier versus Armenia.
On 25 March 2015, Bendtner scored a hat-trick as Denmark came from behind to win 3–2 against the United States in a friendly at NRGi Park in Aarhus.
In November 2009, it was reported that Bendtner was seen in Hyde Park with former Baroness Caroline Iuel-Brockdorff, a socialite and close friend of the Danish Royal Family.In 2008 she divorced banker Rory Fleming, nephew of James Bond writer Ian Fleming, with whom she has had two children.
The couple met when Iuel-Brockdorff was filmed renovating her family home Valdemar's Castle on a reality show. Bendtner was a guest and they did a photoshoot together to promote his appearance. In July 2010, Bendtner revealed through his official website that he was going to become a father. On 16 December 2010, Iuel-Brockdorff gave birth by Caesarean section at London's Portland Hospital to a son.
Bendtner has a cult following who refer to him as "Lord Bendtner". In March 2015, Danish celebrity tabloid Se og Hør bought him a square foot of land in Scotland to bestow him the title of "Lord", and according to his agent, he considered it a "fun gimmick". Bendtner has also taken part in the joke, uploading on Instagram a poster of him holding the Ballon d'Or and running as a candidate to be Prime Minister in the June 2015 Danish election.
As of match played 23 April 2016
Scores and results list Denmark's goal tally first.
Juventus
Serie A: 2012–13
Wolfsburg
DFB-Pokal: 2014–15
DFL-Supercup: 2015
Danish Under-17 Player of the Year: 2004
Danish Talent of the Year: 2007
Danish Football Player of the Year: 2009
