The Danish Football Association (Danish: Dansk Boldspil-Union; DBU) is the governing body of football in Denmark. It is the organization of the Danish football clubs and runs the professional Danish football leagues and the men's and women's national teams. It is based in the city of Brøndby and is a founding member of both FIFA and UEFA. The DBU has also been the governing body of futsal in Denmark since 2008.
The DBU was founded in 1889 and was the first Football Association outside of Great Britain and Ireland. However, it did not register games officially before the 1908 Summer Olympics, meaning that the win in the 1906 Intercalated Olympics tournament was not officially recorded by the DBU.
Leagues
Superliga
First Division (1. Division)
Second Divisions (2. Division) (East and West groups)
Denmark Series (Danmarksserien) (3 groups)
Cups
DBU Pokalen
Elite Division (Elite Divisionen)
First Division (1. Division)
Danish Series (Danmarksserien) (3 groups)
Cup (Landspokalturneringen)
The DBU is separated into 6 regional associations, based on the former counties of Denmark:
DBU Jutland, which in turn is separated into 4 regions:
Region 1: Nordjylland County
Region 2: Viborg and Ringkøbing counties
Region 3: Århus and Vejle counties
Region 4: Ribe and South Jutland counties
DBU Funen: Funen County
DBU Zealand: West Zealand, Roskilde, Frederiksborg, Copenhagen counties and Zealand part of Storstrøm County
DBU Copenhagen: Frederiksberg and Copenhagen municipalities
DBU Lolland-Falster: Non-Zealand part of Storstrøm County
DBU Bornholm: Bornholm municipality
The Faroe Islands and Greenland, which are autonomous territories within Denmark, have their own football associations and are not part of the DBU. Greenland is not a member of FIFA or any continental federation, but the Faroe Islands are a member of both FIFA and UEFA.
The DBU awards the best national team players each year, with an award to the best senior team player, as well as the best player in three of the DBU's six national youth teams.
Player of the Year
Since 1963, the DBU has awarded the Danish Player of the Year in a vote amongst the Danish players. In the time of amateur football, only players in the domestic league could achieve the prize, and even after the emergence of paid football in 1978, no players in foreign clubs were eligible for the award. When the award was finally opened to all Danish players, domestic and abroad, in 1983, national team captain Morten Olsen was the first player to win the Player of the Year award taking all Danish players into consideration. The record number of award wins is four, by Brian Laudrup (1989, 1992, 1995, and 1997).
Young Players of the Year
The Young Players of the Year Awards on the other hand are sponsored by Arla Foods, the awards were initially known as Mælkens talentpriser (the milk's talent awards) in order to promote the line of dairy products of the company then known as "MD Foods". DBU found new sponsor DONG (later DONG Energy), an oil company, in 2004 but Arla went on to sponsor the prize which was renamed Arla's talentpriser (Arla's talent awards) in 2005.[1][2][3]
