Otorhinolaryngology /oʊtoʊˌraɪnoʊˌlærənˈɡɒlədʒi/ (also called otolaryngology) is the area of medicine that deals with conditions of the ear, nose, and throat (ENT) region. The specialty is often treated as a unit with surgery of the head and neck (otolaryngology–head and neck surgery, or OHNS). Doctors who specialize in this area are called otorhinolaryngologists, otolaryngologists, ENT doctors, ENT surgeons, or head and neck surgeons. Patients seek treatment from an otorhinolaryngologist for diseases of the ear, nose, throat, or base of the skull, and for the surgical management of cancers and benign tumors of the head and neck.
The term is a combination of New Latin combining forms (oto- + rhino- + laryngo- + -logy) derived from four Ancient Greek words: οὖς ous (gen.: ὠτός otos), "ear", ῥίς rhis, "nose", λάρυγξ larynx, "larynx" and -λογία logia, "study" (cf. Greek ωτορινολαρυγγολόγος, "otorhinolaryngologist").
Otorhinolaryngologists are physicians (MD, DO, MBBS, MBChB, etc.) who, in the United States, complete at least five years of surgical residency training. This is composed of one year in general surgical training and four years in otorhinolaryngology–head and neck surgery. (In the past it varied between two and three years of each.) In Canada, practitioners complete a five-year residency training after medical school.
Following residency training, some otorhinolaryngologists complete an advanced sub-specialty fellowship, where training can be one to two years in duration. In the United States and Canada, otorhinolaryngology is one of the most competitive specialties in medicine in which to obtain a residency position following medical school.
In the United Kingdom entrance to otorhinolaryngology higher surgical training is highly competitive and involves a rigorous national selection process. The training programme consists of 6 years of higher surgical training after which trainees frequently undertake fellowships in an otorhinolaryngology sub-speciality prior to becoming a consultant.
(* Currently recognized by American Board of Medical Subspecialties)
Squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity, pharynx and larynx
Oral cancer
Skin Cancer of the head & neck
Thyroid cancer
Endocrine surgery of the head and neck (thyroidectomy, parathyroidectomy)
Microvascular free flap reconstruction
Skull base surgery
Salivary gland cancer
Dizziness
BPPV – benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
Labyrinthitis/Vestibular neuronitis
Ménière's disease/Endolymphatic hydrops
Perilymphatic fistula
Acoustic neuroma
Hearing loss
Mastoiditis
Otitis externa – outer ear or ear canal inflammation
Otitis media – middle ear inflammation
Perforated eardrum (hole in the eardrum due to infection, trauma, explosion or loud noise)
Ear surgery
Rhinology pertains to sinus diseases and the anterior skull base.
Sinusitis – acute, chronic
Environmental allergies
Rhinitis
Pituitary tumor
Empty nose syndrome
Severe or recurrent epistaxis
Adenoidectomy
Caustic ingestion
Cricotracheal resection
Decannulation
Laryngomalacia
Laryngotracheal reconstruction
Myringotomy and tubes
Obstructive sleep apnea – pediatric
Tonsillectomy
Dysphonia/hoarseness
Laryngitis
Reinke's edema
Vocal cord nodules and polyps
Spasmodic dysphonia
Tracheostomy
Cancer of the larynx
Vocology – science and practice of voice habilitation
Facial Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery is a one-year fellowship open to otorhinolaryngologists and plastic surgeons who wish to specialize in the aesthetic and reconstructive surgery of the head, face, and neck.
Rhinoplasty and septoplasty
Facelift (rhytidectomy)
Browlift
Blepharoplasty
Otoplasty
Genioplasty
Injectable cosmetic treatments
Trauma to the face
Nasal bone fracture
Mandible fracture
Orbital fracture
Frontal sinus fracture
Complex lacerations and soft tissue damage
Skin cancer (e.g. Basal Cell Carcinoma)
American Board of Otolaryngology
American Osteopathic Board of Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology
Head mirror
Surgeon
Audiology
Oral and maxillofacial surgery
Speech-language pathology
