The 2008–09 Czech First League, known as the Gambrinus liga for sponsorship reasons, was the sixteenth season of Czech Republic's top-tier of football. It began on 2 August 2008 and ended on 30 May 2009. Slavia Prague were the defending champions. Slavia secured their 17th title overall after a 3–1 win away against Viktoria Žižkov in 28th round. They were the first club to defend Czech title since the 2000–01 season.
Most and Bohemians 1905 were relegated to the second division after finishing last and second to last, respectively, in the previous season.
FK Bohemians Prague (Střížkov) (as champions) and 1. FK Příbram (as runners-up) were promoted from the second division.
^1 Zlin manager Josef Mazura was relieved of his duties after the 7th round of matches; Ladislav Minář took over as caretaker manager until the appointment of Stanislav Levý before the 12th round.
^2 Brno appointed Aleš Křeček to the position of caretaker manager after the 11th round of matches until Miroslav Beránek took over in the winter break.
Source: fotbal.idnes.cz (Czech)
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head goals scored; 5) goal difference; 6) number of goals scored1Teplice won the 2008–09 Czech Cup and qualified for the play-off round of the UEFA Europa League.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Head-to-Head: used when head-to-head record is used to rank tied teams.
Source: fotbal.idnes.cz (Czech)
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
Source: fotbal.idnes.cz (Czech)
15 goals
 Andrej Kerić (Slovan Liberec)
11 goals
 Daniel Huňa (Příbram)
 Tomáš Necid (Slavia Prague)
10 goals
 David Lafata (Jablonec)
 Riste Naumov (Viktoria Žižkov)
 Michal Papadopulos (Mladá Boleslav)
9 goals
 Tijani Belaid (Slavia Prague)
 Michal Ordoš (Sigma Olomouc)
 Tomáš Sedláček (České Budějovice)
8 goals
 Roman Dobeš (Bohemians Prague)
 Pavel Horváth (Viktoria Plzeň)
 Marek Kincl (Bohemians Prague)
2008–09 Czech Cup
2008–09 Czech 2. Liga
