Jakup Jimmy Durmaz (born 22 March 1989), formerly known as Jimmy Touma, is a Swedish footballer playing for Olympiacos. His relatives Sharbel Touma and David Durmaz are also known footballers.
Durmaz was born in the city of Örebro, in central Sweden, into a Syriac Orthodox family. His father migrated from Midyat in southeastern Turkey, thus, Durmaz was eligible for Turkish citizenship, which he received upon moving to Turkey in 2012. He began playing for BK Forward in his early teens.
Touma came to Malmö FF from BK Forward in July 2008. He made his Allsvenskan debut on 14 July 2008 against Hammarby IF. Prior to the 2009 season, he decided to switch his surname to Durmaz. His breakthrough came in the 2010 league winning season when he started in 15 games and played 27. Durmaz scored the opening goal against A.C. Milan in an exhibition game on 14 August 2011. Durmaz continued to the play regularly for the club during the 2011 season and finished the season with 27 league matches played and four goals scored.
On 27 June 2012 Durmaz confirmed to Swedish media that he had signed a contract with Turkish club Gençlerbirliği S.K. for three years. Durmaz was supposed to move to Gençlerbirliği on 1 July 2012 or on 1 January 2013 when his contract with Malmö would have run out if the two clubs were unable to come to an agreement. Durmaz transfer to the Turkish club was confirmed on 17 July 2012.
On 22 August 2014, Olympiacos announced the transfer of Jimmy Durmaz. He opened his Olympiacos account with a close-range effort against OFI Crete on 14 September. He also earned a penalty against Veria the following week. The 25-year-old signed for the Greek title holders in August and watched from the bench as they began their campaign with a 3-2 victory over last season's UEFA Champions League finalists club Atlético de Madrid. "Olympiacos have four wingers and competition for places is intense," he said, although he has already featured in three Super League matches and one Greek Cup tie. Durmaz is a classic wide man with excellent dribbling skills and delicious left-foot crosses, he can play on either flank although Míchel usually fields him on the right with a licence to shoot from distance.
On 29 January 2015, Jimmy Durmaz is eager to remain at Olympiakos after his hat-trick against Tyrnavos in the Greek Cup. The Swedish winger scored three goals and gave two assists in the 8-0 thrashing against Tyrnavos. “It’s just speculation. I’m concentrated on my duties with Olympiakos and my only concern is how to help Olympiakos and how to get better,” he underlined.
On 3 September 2015, Durmaz poked surprising from Olympiakos's UEFA Champions League squad, a surprise for the midfielder, who says that he was not informed from the club prior to the selection. Durmaz has been dropped from Marco Silva in the Champions League and his agent Martin Dahlin paid tribute to his client after his decent performance against Platanias F.C. “A goal and an assist for Jimmy Durmaz in the Olympiakos 3-1 home win against Platanias F.C.. Jimmy once again showed that he deserves to be in the first XI both at Olympiakos and in the Swedish National Team,” Dalin wrote in social media.
On 23 September 2015, Olympiacos manager Marco Silva paid tribute to Jimmy Durmaz after his excellent display against Skoda Xanthi. Durmaz gave Olympiacos the lead with a stunning striker just before the interval and had a decent performance in the second half as well. After the game, Marco Silva hailed the Swedish midfielder who has been left out from the UEFA Champions League squad by the Portuguese manager. “Undoubtedly the behaviour and the performance of Jimmy Durmaz is remarkable. It wasn't easy for him to cope with the European elimination, but he always works hard in the training. This has won my confidence on him,” Silva underlined. On 30 November 2015, Olympiakos broke the consecutive wins record yesterday and Jimmy Durmaz spoke at club's official website about this record."11 victories at 11 games are a stunning accomplishement, it was an incredible moment and fans should support to maintain the winning streak", said the Swedish winger.
Durmaz made his debut for Sweden on 8 February 2011 in a friendly game against Cyprus. Durmaz was selected for the annual training camp for the Sweden national team in January 2012. The squad selection for the camp traditionally feature the best Swedish players in domestic and other Scandinavian leagues.
As of 17 April 2016.
Malmö FF
Allsvenskan (1) : 2010
Olympiacos
Superleague Greece (2): 2014–15, 2015-16
Greek Football Cup (1): 2014–15
