Carlos Alberto Martínez Tevez (Spanish pronunciation: [ˈkarlos ˈteβes]; born 5 February 1984) is an Argentine professional footballer who plays as a forward for Boca Juniors and the Argentina national team. His energy, skill, and goal scoring rate have made him an indispensable player for his club sides throughout his career, in the eyes of fellow players and media alike.
Tevez began his career with Boca Juniors, winning the Copa Libertadores and Intercontinental Cup in 2003 before moving to Corinthians where he won the Brasileiro. In 2006 he moved to West Ham United, helping the team remain in the Premier League in his only season. Tevez's prolonged transfers to West Ham and Manchester United were plagued by issues regarding third-party ownership by Media Sports Investment, and their resulting sagas paved changes to both Premier League and FIFA regulations.
Tevez transferred to Manchester United in 2007 and in his two years won several trophies including two league titles and the Champions League. In 2009 he joined Manchester City for £47 million, becoming the first player to move between the two rival clubs since Terry Cooke in 1999. Despite missing four months of the 2011–12 season following a dispute, Tevez returned to help City win their first league title in 44 years. In 2013, he joined Juventus for £12 million, finishing as the team's top goalscorer and winning the Scudetto in his first season. After winning a domestic double and reaching the Champions League final in his second season, he returned to Boca Juniors in June 2015 where he won another domestic double, becoming the first footballer to win two domestic league and cup doubles in one calendar year.
Since his debut for Argentina in 2005, Tevez has over 75 caps. A gold medal winner at the 2004 Olympics, he also played at two World Cups, a Confederations Cup, and four Copa América tournaments.
Tevez was born Carlos Alberto Martínez in Ciudadela, Buenos Aires Province, and raised in the neighbourhood of Ejército de Los Andes, better known as "Fuerte Apache". It was from there that he got the nickname of "El Apache". His parents changed his surname to his mother's during a conflict between his junior club All Boys and Boca Juniors.
Tevez has a distinctive burn scar that runs down his neck from his right ear to his chest. He was accidentally scalded with boiling water as a child, which caused third-degree burns and kept him hospitalised in intensive care for nearly two months. After joining Boca Juniors, Tevez refused an offer from the club to have them cosmetically improved, saying that the scars were a part of who he was in the past and who he is today.
Aged 16, Tevez made his debut for Boca Juniors against Talleres de Córdoba in the during the Torneo Apertura of the 2001–02 Argentine Primera División, on 21 October 2001. Boca Juniors were crowned champions of the 2001 Copa Libertadores and faced Bayern Munich at the 2001 Intercontinental Cup on 27 November, where they lost 1–0, however Tevez was not included in the squad. He went on to score 1 goal in 11 league appearances in the 2001–02 season. Boca had finished in 1st place of their 2002 Copa Libertadores group and had reached the quarter-final stage, where they faced Paraguay's Club Olimpia. Tevez scored after 18 minutes in the first-leg to give Boca Juniors a 1–0 lead, until Olimpia levelled the scores in the 67th minute when Boca defender Cristian Traverso scored an own goal, on 8 May. Boca lost the second-leg 1–0 in Asunción on 16 May. Boca finished three points behind Independiente to finish in second position during the Torneo Apertura. Boca Juniors eventually finished four points behind River Plate to claim second position in the Torneo Clausura.
Tevez scored 10 goals in 32 appearances for Boca during the 2002–03 season. During the 2002 Copa Sudamericana, Boca were eliminated 3–1 on aggregate by Gimnasia de La Plata in the first-round. Boca Juniors participated at the 2003 Copa Libertadores and reached the final of the competition, where they faced Santos. Boca won 5–1 on aggregate, with Tevez scoring in Boca's 3–1 away win in the second-leg. Tevez was also voted as the tournament's best player. Tevez scored 12 goals in 23 appearances during the 2003–04 season. Boca were crowned champions of the Torneo Apertura, where Tevez finished as the Apertura's seventh top goal-scorer with 8 goals. Boca then finished in second spot of the Torneo Clausura, four points behind River Plate. During the 2003 Copa Sudamericana, Boca Juniors reached the quarter-final stages where they were eliminated by Colombia's Atlético Nacional 5–1 on aggregate. During the 2003 Intercontinental Cup, Tevez, who had just returned to the side from injury, entered the field in the 73rd minute for Guillermo Barros Schelotto, as Boca Juniors beat Milan 3–1 on penalties to claim the Intercontinental Cup. Boca had reached the final of the 2004 Copa Sudamericana, where they beat Bolivia's Bolívar 2–1 on aggregate. Tevez scored in Boca's 2–0 second-leg win. Boca finished as runners-up of the 2004 Copa Libertadores. Tevez scored in both games of Boca's round of 16 wins against Peru's Club Sporting Cristal. Tevez also scored for Boca Juniors in their 2–1 second-leg loss to River Plate, having drawn them level 2–2 on aggregate, which Boca went on to win 5–4 on penalties. Boca played against Colombia's Once Caldas in the final, where after drawing 1–1 on aggregate, Boca lost 2–0 on penalties. Tevez netted 2 goals in 9 league appreances in the Torneo Apertura of the 2004–05 season. Boca Juniors faced Peru's Cienciano in the 2004 Recopa Sudamericana on 7 September. Tevez scored after 33 minutes to give Boca Juniors a 1–0 lead, but Cienciano equalised and the match was decided by a penalty shoot-out. Boca lost 4–2 on penalties, where Tevez had failed to convert his side's second spot-kick. During his time at Boca Juniors, Tevez was listed by the media as a potential heir to Diego Maradona.
In January 2005, Tevez was transferred to Brazilian Série A club Corinthians for $16 million cash and youth players worth $2 million. Joorabchian and Tevez also received an additional 15% and 10% transfer fee respectively. The transfer fee has also been reported as $22 million. Tevez signed a five-year, £6.85 million contract following the Brazilian club's deal with Media Sports Investment. The deal was the biggest transfer ever in South American football. Investigation by Brazilian police later revealed that MSI owned 35% of the player rights (through BVI company MSI Group Limited) while another 65% owned by Just Sport Limited, another BVI company. Tevez captained the squad to the 2005 Campeonato Brasileiro, and was named the league's best player by the Brazilian Football Confederation, becoming the first non-Brazilian player to win the award since 1976.
On 23 August 2006, Sky Sports reported that Tevez was refusing to play for Corinthians. Tevez confirmed on his website on 31 August that both he and Javier Mascherano were signing for West Ham United on permanent deals for undisclosed fees. Media reports speculated that other Premier League clubs turned down the opportunity of signing Tevez and Mascherano because of stipulations put in place by third parties MSI and Global Soccer Agencies, who owned both players' rights. The investigation by the Premier League later revealed that Tevez was signed from MSI and Just Sports Inc., and West Ham had the registration rights of the player, but the transfer fees were fully contributed to MSI and Just Sports (the economic rights).
Tevez made his West Ham debut coming on as a second-half substitute in the 1–1 home draw with Aston Villa on 10 September 2006. After this game though, West Ham went on a nine-game winless streak (one draw and eight defeats), which included seven consecutive matches without scoring. This winless run also included going out of both the UEFA Cup and League Cup. In November of the same season, Tevez left the ground early after being substituted and throwing a tantrum during a league match against Sheffield United, and as punishment, his teammates decided that Tevez had to donate half of a week's wages to charity and train in a Brazil jersey. Tevez refused to wear the shirt, saying, "I played in Brazil and have a great respect for Brazil and Brazilians but I'm Argentine and won't wear that shirt."
On 6 January 2007, Tevez made his first start for West Ham under the new management of Alan Curbishley in a 3–0 FA Cup third round victory over Brighton & Hove Albion. He scored his first West Ham goal and assisted two others on 4 March 2007 in a 4–3 home defeat to Tottenham. In April 2007, West Ham were fined a record £5.5 million for breaching Premier League rules over the signings of Tevez and Mascherano; and Tevez was cleared to play for West Ham by the Premier League after changes were planned to be made to a third-party agreement related to him. That same month, Tevez was named the club's Hammer of the Year.
In relegation-threatened West Ham's final league match of the season against Manchester United on 13 May, Tevez scored the only goal in a 1-0 victory. The match result secured West Ham's stay in the top flight after Sheffield United's failure to beat Wigan at home on the same day.
In June 2007, Tevez rejected a move to Internazionale, and his representative, Kia Joorabchian, stated that he was in discussions to stay with West Ham, as the player had settled into the Premier League and wanted to remain in England. Tevez replied that he would not make a decision until the Copa América wrapped up in July.
On 5 July, the Daily Mail reported that Tevez had agreed to join Manchester United in a deal worth £20 million, which was subject to an appeal from West Ham; West Ham said in turn that they would block any transfer unless they received a majority of the transfer fee. The next day, West Ham released a statement that Tevez was under contract until June 2010, in addition to denying having held negotiations with any other club. Joorabchian contradicted the claim by saying that West Ham had indeed given permission to United to engage in talks.
Manchester United and West Ham sought FIFA's assistance to rule on Tevez's ownership, but on 24 July, FIFA suggested that the case be referred to the Court of Arbitration for Sport. Joorabchian intervened by issuing West Ham with a High Court writ "...to compel West Ham to release the registration of Carlos Tévez in accordance with contracts entered into between the parties." However, the case never made it to court as the Premier League approved an agreement between West Ham and MSI, in which MSI would pay £2 million to West Ham, who in turn released Tevez from his contract.
Manchester United put forward a proposed two-year loan deal for Tevez, which was approved on 10 August 2007. He made his debut on 15 August when he started in place of the injured Wayne Rooney in a 1–1 draw against Portsmouth. On 23 September, he scored his first goal in a 2–0 home victory against Chelsea. In November, United manager Alex Ferguson confirmed that the club wanted to sign Tevez permanently. "He'll get me 15 goals this season, and what's more, they'll be important goals." Tevez was greeted with an ovation and singing of "There's Only One Carlos Tevez" from the West Ham supporters upon his return to Upton Park for an away match (lost by Manchester United) on 29 December.
Tevez scored a total of five goals during Manchester United's successful 2007–08 Champions League campaign. He also scored the first penalty in the shoot-out against Chelsea in the final, which Manchester United won 6–5 after the match had ended 1–1 after extra time.
He scored his first league goal of the 2008–09 season on 13 September 2008 in a 2–1 away defeat to Liverpool, and his first hat-trick came on 3 December 2008, when he scored a quartet of goals in United's 5–3 League Cup win over Blackburn Rovers in the fifth round. His first Champions League goal of the season, against Aalborg BK on 10 December, was the fastest goal scored in the tournament for 2008–09 at two minutes and 41 seconds.
On 21 December, Tevez started for United in the 2008 FIFA Club World Cup final, which United won 1–0 over Ecuadorean club LDU Quito, but he was substituted in the 51st minute for Jonny Evans after Nemanja Vidić was sent off.
On 10 May 2009, Tevez was reported as saying that he believed his time at Manchester United would come to an end that summer and he expressed his dissatisfaction at not having been offered a permanent contract with the club and having been dropped from the team despite, in his opinion, not having played badly. Despite this outburst, Tevez was named in Manchester United's starting XI for the derby match against Manchester City later that day, before scoring the second of United's two goals on the stroke of half-time, which prompted chants of "Fergie, sign him up" from some of the club's fans. After the match, manager Alex Ferguson refused to be drawn on the subject of Tevez's future with the club, saying "I didn't read any of the papers. He's a Manchester United player."
The following game for Manchester United was away at Wigan Athletic. Tevez did not start the game, but came off the bench on 58 minutes and scored the equaliser three minutes later with a flamboyant back-heeled finish. His introduction immediately improved the team's play and Michael Carrick scored the winner on 86 minutes. After the game, to the relief of most United fans, Alex Ferguson announced that the club had commenced talks to sign Tevez on a permanent deal. This news came on the same day as claims in The Sun that United lawyers were looking into the possibility of a Bosman-type case, which would allow Tevez to be signed for free. Tevez started the next game against Arsenal, but was substituted by Park Ji-Sung in the 66th minute. As he left the field, the Manchester United supporters applauded him, in his last game at Old Trafford for Manchester United. United chief executive David Gill suggested that Tevez's future would be resolved by early June 2009. Although United agreed to meet the option fee of £25.5 million and offered Tevez a five-year contract that would have made him one of the club's top earners, Tevez's advisors informed the club that he no longer wished to play for Manchester United. Nevertheless, reports also emerged that Tevez had ruled out signing for Liverpool, given the implications of a Manchester United player moving to join their north-west rivals.
After protracted negotiations, Tevez signed a five-year contract with Manchester United's cross-town rivals, Manchester City, after a medical on 14 July 2009. On 12 September, it was claimed that the transfer fee was £47 million, a British transfer record, but this was later denied by both Manchester City and Media Sports Investments. Tevez was given the number 32 shirt, just as he was at Manchester United and West Ham. In signing for Manchester City, Tevez became the first player to move between the two Manchester clubs since Terry Cooke moved from United to City in 1999. After signing Tevez, Manchester City erected a blue 'Welcome to Manchester' billboard with Tevez in the background. The billboard was located at the top of Deansgate in Manchester city centre, which leads to Salford and Trafford, where Old Trafford is outside the boundaries of Manchester.
He made his City debut coming off the bench against Blackburn Rovers in a 2–0 away win. He scored his first goal for the club on 27 August 2009 against Crystal Palace in the second round of the League Cup, heading in City's second goal in a 2–0 victory.
During September 2009, Tevez suffered a knee injury whilst on international duty with Argentina, which would keep him out for two to three weeks, forcing him to miss the match against Arsenal. It was also thought that Tevez would miss the Manchester derby the following weekend, but he recovered in time to play in the match. He set up his side's first goal for Gareth Barry, but City ended up losing 4–3.
Tevez scored his first and second Premier League goals for the club during a 3–1 win over his former club, West Ham United prompting City fans to imitate the chant "Fergie, sign him up". Later that week, he scored the third goal in Manchester City's 5–1 win over Scunthorpe United in the League Cup, and three weeks later, he scored his third successive cup goal in the quarter-finals against Arsenal. The following week he scored the winner in a 2–1 win over Chelsea. One week later he scored twice, with an impressive brace, in a 3–3 draw with Bolton Wanderers. His next two goals came against Sunderland and Stoke City, scoring six goals in as many matches. On 28 December he continued his goalscoring run, scoring two against Wolverhampton Wanderers, making it eight goals in seven games for the striker. Tevez netted his first Premier League hat-trick for Manchester City on 11 January 2010 in a 4–1 home win over Blackburn Rovers, coincidentally on the same night he received his first ever Premier League Player of the Month award for December 2009.
On 19 January 2010, Tevez spearheaded City's attack as the club defeated former club and cross city rivals Manchester United in the first leg of the League Cup semi-final at the City of Manchester Stadium. Despite United taking a 1–0 lead, Tevez hit the equaliser in from the penalty spot before heading the winner in the 65th minute. On 27 January, Tevez scored his and Manchester City's third goal of the tie in the second leg at Old Trafford. However, a stoppage-time goal from Wayne Rooney sent Manchester United through to the final with a 4–3 aggregate win.
On 27 February 2010 Tevez scored two goals against Chelsea in a 4–2 away win over the league leaders, following his return from compassionate leave in Argentina. On 29 March 2010, Tevez scored his second Premier League hat-trick for Manchester City against Wigan in a 3–0 victory. At the end of his first year at Manchester City, he was given two club awards, the Etihad Player of the Year award and the Players' Player of the Year award.
On 18 August 2010, he was made club captain by manager Roberto Mancini, replacing defender Kolo Touré. Tevez continued his scoring form in the league from the 2009–10 in the 2010–11 season with two goals in the 3–0, victory over Liverpool. Against Wigan Athletic, Tevez scored again in a 2–0 win. He continued his goal scoring run in a 1–0 win against Chelsea taking his tally to six goals in five games. He scored a penalty in a 2–1 home win against Newcastle, and followed up with two more goals against Blackpool in a 3–2 away win.
In December 2010, despite his agent recently asking the club to renegotiate and improve his contract, Tevez handed the club a written transfer request, citing family reasons and a breakdown in "relationship with certain executives and individuals at the club". The transfer request was rejected by the club with a senior club official describing Tevez's reasons for wanting to leave as "ludicrous and nonsensical", whilst the club also stated that the player would not be sold in the January transfer window and will seek compensation for breach of contract from his agent if he retires or refuses to play.
On 20 December 2010, Tevez withdrew his transfer request and expressed his 'absolute commitment' to Manchester City following clear-the-air talks. On 26 December 2010, Tevez scored twice as City won 3–1 away at Newcastle United. Further goals against Leicester City, Wolverhampton Wanderers, West Bromwich Albion, Birmingham City and Notts County took him to 50 goals for the club. The mere 73 games played to reach this figure made him the second fastest player in City's history to reach that figure, short of Derek Kevan's 64-game record.
After missing the 1–0 FA Cup semi-final victory over Manchester United at Wembley Stadium due to a hamstring injury, Tevez returned to captain City on 14 May 2011 in the 1–0 final over Stoke City. Two days later, amid rumours of his departure to Italy in the summer, he announced his desire to stay at Eastlands. However, on 8 June, he told an Argentine chat show host that he "would not even return there on vacation".
Due to his commitments to the national team in the summer, Tevez was not on the bench for City in the first league game of the 2011–12 season against Swansea City. Tevez made his first appearance of the season in City's second game of the season against Bolton Wanderers coming on in the 68th minute for fellow Argentine Sergio Agüero. Despite losing the captain's armband to Vincent Kompany, Tevez stated in an interview that he has had a complete turn around on his stance on Manchester and that he is not moving, "I'm happy at City and I'm not moving from there". Tevez started his first game of the season against Wigan Athletic in which Tevez missed a penalty that was won by David Silva but played well in the game which ended 3–0 to City with Agüero scoring a hat trick. On 14 September Tevez made an appearance in City's first ever Champions League game against Napoli, coming on as a second-half substitute for Edin Džeko in a 1–1 draw.
On 27 September 2011, Tevez was named as a substitute for City's game at Bayern Munich. Mancini claimed that Tevez refused to come on as a substitute in the second half, when City was 2–0 down to the German club, although Tevez denied this calling it a misunderstanding. Tevez's actions received widespread condemnation from various pundits and commentators, with Mancini claiming that he wanted Tevez "out of Manchester City", and that he would never play for the club again. Tevez was suspended by Manchester City for a maximum period of two weeks as the club began an investigation into whether he refused to come on as a substitute. Following discussions with Mancini, owner Sheikh Mansour authorised the placing of Tevez on garden leave where the Argentinian would be paid in full but instructed to stay away from the Manchester City training ground.
Having failed to secure a transfer, Tevez was fined several weeks' wages and denied a loyalty bonus, but returned to Manchester and resumed training on 14 February 2012, with the backing of his fellow players. Mancini had previously stated that he was ready to welcome Tevez to the fold to boost their bid for the Premier League title. On 21 February, Tevez publicly apologised "sincerely and unreservedly" for his conduct, and withdrew his appeal over the City's decision to severely fine him. He was however omitted from the club's 2011–12 Europa League squad. On 23 February, Roberto Mancini drew a line under his dispute with Tevez, and insisted that he was available for selection.
Tevez made his return to the Manchester City first-team in a 2–1 home victory against Chelsea on 21 March, coming on for Nigel de Jong in the 66th minute before providing the assist for Samir Nasri's winning goal. His first goal of the season came four games later, the third goal in a 4–0 home win against West Bromwich Albion on 11 April. On 14 April, Tevez scored a hat-trick and provided an assist for Agüero in a 6–1 away win against Norwich City. He celebrated his third strike with a golf swing, in response the pundits who questioned his desire during his leave of absence in where he was pictured on the golf course. He also played in City's title-winning game against Queens Park Rangers on 13 May.
On 12 August 2012, Tevez scored Manchester City's second goal in a 3–2 win over Chelsea in the 2012 Community Shield. The following weekend, he scored City's first goal of the 2012–13 Premier League season against Southampton. On 26 August, Tevez scored his third goal in three matches in a 2–2 draw with Liverpool, his 100th goal in English football. The following week, he scored the final goal in a 3–1 win over QPR to become the first Manchester City player to score 50 goals for the club in the Premier League. On 3 November, when City met West Ham United at Upton Park, Tevez received a warm welcome from West Ham fans, and responded by giving them a cross-armed 'Hammers' salute. Speaking after the game, Tevez said: "I have always had a fantastic relationship with the West Ham supporters. They were singing my name before the game and that's why I did that (Hammers salute), in tribute to them. I've always felt really at home there."
On 19 January 2013, it was reported that Tevez had revealed that he nearly retired from professional football in 2012 in the midst of his Manchester City and Argentina crisis. He also spoke about his future and when he would return to Argentina. "I’ve already said I want to retire wearing a Boca shirt, it's my dream as well as my family's. After the World Cup, we'll see. I could finish my contract next year and go to Boca."
On 26 June 2013, Tevez signed a three-year contract with Juventus for a reported £12 million, with the fee subject to performance. The fee combined with wages and bonuses due to Tevez in the final year of his contract was estimated to save Manchester City about £27 million.
On 18 August 2013, Tevez made his competitive debut for Juventus, scoring the fourth goal in a 4–0 rout of Lazio in the 2013 Supercoppa Italiana. On 24 August, he made his first appearance in Serie A, scoring the winning goal as Juventus beat Sampdoria 1–0 in their opening match of the 2013–14 season.
On 15 December 2013, Tevez scored his first hat-trick for Juve in a 4–0 Serie A win against Sassuolo at Juventus Stadium. On 23 February 2014, he scored the only goal in Juve's 1–0 defeat of Torino in the Derby della Mole.
He ended the season as the team's top goalscorer with 21 goals in all competitions, and was named as Juve's "Player of the Season". He was the third-highest goalscorer in Serie A with 19 goals, as the Bianconeri won a 30th Scudetto.
On 16 September 2014, Tevez scored twice in Juventus' 2–0 win against Malmö FF in the group stage of the 2014–15 Champions League, his first goals in the competition since 2009. He scored another brace in the 2014 Supercoppa Italiana against Napoli in Doha on 22 December, but hit the post with the first attempt as Juventus lost in a penalty shoot-out.
On 24 February 2015, Tevez scored the opening goal in Juventus's 2–1 defeat of Borussia Dortmund in the Champions League round of 16 first leg. Three weeks later, he scored twice and assisted another at the Westfalenstadion as Juve beat the German club 3–0 to qualify for the quarter-finals. On 5 May, Tevez scored from a penalty to give Juventus a 2–1 victory against defending champions Real Madrid in the first leg of the UEFA Champions League semi-final, at the Juventus Stadium in Turin; this was his 50th goal for Juventus.
Tevez ended the Serie A season with 20 goals, helping Juventus to a fourth consecutive Scudetto. On 6 June 2015, he started in the 2015 UEFA Champions League Final as La Vecchia Signora was defeated 3–1 by FC Barcelona at Berlin's Olympiastadion; Tevez was involved in Álvaro Morata's temporary equaliser, as he scored from a rebound after Barcelona's goalkeeper Marc-André ter Stegen had parried the Argentine's initial shot.
On 26 June 2015, while representing Argentina at the 2015 Copa América, Tevez returned to his first club Boca Juniors, to pursue his dream of winning the Argentine Primera División. On 13 July 2015, Juventus confirmed that Tevez had transferred to Boca Juniors for a fee of €6.5 million. On 15 July 2015, Tevez was named to the 10-man shortlist for the 2015 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award, where it was announced on 12 August that he placed ninth. Tevez made his first appearance since his return to the club on 18 July in a 2–1 win over Quilmes, and scored his first goal from a free-kick on 29 July in a 3–0 win over Banfield in the last 32 of the Copa Argentina. Four days later he scored the first league goal of his return, in an eventual 3–4 home loss to Unión. Tevez had a large impact, scoring nine goals in 15 games as he finished the 2015 season by achieving his goal of winning the Argentine Primera División and Copa Argentina double with Boca Juniors, becoming the first footballer to win two domestic league and cup doubles in one calendar year. On 14 December 2015, Tevez was named the 2014–15 Serie A Footballer of the Year.
Tevez was criticised in the media for his negative performance following Boca's 4–0 defeat to San Lorenzo in the 2015 Supercopa Argentina on 10 February 2016. On 20 April 2016, Tevez scored two goals in a 6–2 win over Deportivo Cali, which allowed Boca to top their Copa Libertadores Group and advance to the last 16 unbeaten. On 5 May, he scored from a penalty and later set up a goal for team-mate Cristian Pavón, as Boca defeated Cerro Porteño 3–1 at home in the second leg of the round of 16 of the Copa Libertadores to advance to the quarter-finals, following a 5–2 win on aggregate. On 19 May, he scored Boca's first penalty in their 4–3 home shootout victory over Nacional, in the second leg of the Copa Libertadores quarter-finals, following a 2–2 draw on aggregate, to help his team to advance to the semi-finals of the tournament for the first time since 2012. Boca were eliminated 5–3 on aggregate, however, by Independiente, in the semi-finals of the competition, on 14 July.
Tevez first came into prominence with Argentina while playing in the FIFA U-17 World Championship. At the 2004 Olympic Games in Greece, he won the gold medal – Argentina's first in any event since 1952 – and scored eight goals in six matches to be the top scorer of the competition. This included the winner in the final against Paraguay, two in a 6–0 group-stage rout of Serbia and Montenegro, and a hat-trick in a 4–0 quarter-final win over Costa Rica. Tevez represented Argentina's senior team in the 2004 Copa América, where the team reached the final, only to lose out to rivals Brazil on penalties; he scored a goal in both of the preceding rounds. He was the world's second-highest goalscorer of 2004 in overall international competition with 16 goals, one fewer than Iran forward Ali Daei.
He was also a member of Argentina's 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup squad that lost again to Brazil in the final. Tevez was called up for the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals, and scored his only goal of the tournament in Argentina's 6–0 group stage thrashing of Serbia and Montenegro on 16 June, as a substitute for Javier Saviola. He was also a member of the Argentina squad which reached the 2007 Copa América final; five minutes after coming on for Lionel Messi, he scored to conclude a 4–1 group stage comeback defeat of the United States in Maracaibo.
During 2010 World Cup qualifying, he was sent off twice in a three-game stretch, once against Colombia on 21 November 2007 after he kicked Rubén Darío Bustos in the 24th minute, and then on 9 September 2008 after a late tackle on Darío Verón that earned him a red card in the 31st minute of a 1–1 draw with Paraguay after he had been booked earlier. Tevez later apologised for the incident.
Tevez was again selected in the Argentina squad for the 2010 FIFA World Cup held in South Africa. He scored twice in the tournament, both goals coming in the last 16 match against Mexico. His first goal was a header scored in controversial style as he was in an offside position as Lionel Messi passed to him. However, the offside was missed by the referee's assistant and the goal was allowed to stand. Tevez scored his second goal of the game with a powerful shot from outside the box.
At the 2011 Copa América, Tevez was the only player from either side to miss in the quarter-final penalty shoot-out against Uruguay, resulting in Argentina's elimination. After Alejandro Sabella's appointment as coach in July 2011, Tevez was not selected in an Argentina squad for three years, missing out as the team finished as runner-up at the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
On 27 October 2014, new manager Gerardo Martino recalled Tevez for friendly matches against Portugal and Croatia. He made his return to international football on 12 November 2014, at the Boleyn Ground, in a 2–1 win against Croatia.
In May 2015, Tevez was selected in Argentina's squad for the 2015 Copa América held in Chile. On 26 June, he scored the winning kick in the 5–4 penalty shoot-out defeat of Colombia in the quarter-final, which allowed Arentina to advance to the semi-final. Argentina reached the final, only to be defeated by the hosts on penalties, as Tevez won his third runners-up medal in the tournament.
In May 2016, he was omitted from Argentina's 23-man squad for the Copa América Centenario.
Sheffield United were relegated after their loss to Wigan Athletic on the final day of the 2006–07 season. The Premier League fined West Ham a record £5.5 million in the signing of Tevez and compatriot Javier Mascherano. They were found to have been partially owned by businessman Kia Joorabchian's Media Sports Investment (MSI) company.
Sheffield United first appealed to the league to be reinstated in the Premier League but that failed so they instead moved to exact a financial settlement. Initial media reports suggested that United wanted £30 million, which they believed was the true cost of relegation. The controversy continued for nearly two years, interspersed with various differing media reports and speculations, when, on 17 March 2009, both clubs agreed an out-of-court settlement to end their dispute over this long running saga. West Ham were made to pay £20 million (£4 million a year over the next five seasons) as compensation to Sheffield United.
Tevez is a quick, tenacious, powerful, hard-working, dynamic, and versatile forward. A technical, tactically intelligent, and creative player, with an eye for goal, Tevez is capable of playing as a striker, as a winger, or even as a supporting forward, or as an attacking midfielder, due his finishing and positioning, as well as his vision and passing ability, which enable him to provide assists for team-mates as well as score goals himself. Due to his pace, strength, work-rate, and stamina, Tevez is also extremely useful when possession is lost, and he excels at pressing opponents, aiding his team to win back the ball and start attacking plays, making him effective both defensively and offensively. Tevez is also a skilled dribbler, and he possesses an accurate and powerful shot from distance; he is also an accurate penalty kick and free-kick taker.
Tevez is known for his tango flare goal celebrations ever since playing for Boca Juniors, as well with Corinthians of Brazil. During his time at Manchester United, he would hide a baby's dummy in his shorts and put it in his mouth after scoring a goal as a commemorative gesture to his baby daughter. Since his move to Manchester City, Tevez has often performed a dance where he puts his hands together, bends down and rocks his body; this dance has been named after him as the "Tevez Dance".
Tevez and his wife, Vanesa, have two daughters together: Florencia and Katia. He later sustained an open relationship with 19-year-old actress Brenda Asnicar which lasted about a year.
He once performed as the front-man for his cumbia villera musical group, Piola Vago, with his brother Diego. The group's most successful hit, "Lose Your Control", charted in Argentina.
On 6 February 2009, Tevez was stopped by Greater Manchester Police near junction 7 of the M60 motorway. It was found that Tevez was driving without a full UK driving licence and with illegally tinted windows. His car was then impounded by the police since he could not arrange for it to be removed himself.
Tevez, a keen golfer, caddied for his friend Andrés Romero at the 2012 Open Championship.
As of 6 November 2015
As of 6 November 2015
Boca Juniors
Primera División: 2003 Apertura, 2015
Copa Libertadores: 2003
Copa Sudamericana: 2004
Intercontinental Cup: 2003
Copa Argentina: 2014–15
Corinthians
Campeonato Brasileiro Série A: 2005
Manchester United
Premier League: 2007–08, 2008–09
Football League Cup: 2008–09
FA Community Shield: 2008
UEFA Champions League: 2007–08
FIFA Club World Cup: 2008
Manchester City
Premier League: 2011–12
FA Cup: 2010–11
FA Community Shield: 2012
Juventus
Serie A: 2013–14, 2014–15
Supercoppa Italiana: 2013
Coppa Italia: 2014–15
Argentina
South American U-20 Championship (1): 2003
CONMEBOL Men Pre-Olympic Tournament (1): 2004
Summer Olympics (1): 2004
South American Footballer of the Year: 2003, 2004, 2005
South American Team of the Year: 2003, 2004, 2005
Copa Libertadores MVP Award: 2003
Player of the Year of Argentina: 2003, 2004
Argentine Sportsperson of the Year: 2004
Campeonato Brasileiro Série A Best Player: 2005
Bola de Ouro: 2005
Premier League Golden Boot: 2010–11*
Hammer of the Year: 2007
Manchester City Official Supporter's Player of the Year: 2009–10
Manchester City Player's Player of the Year: 2009–10
PFA Team of the Year: 2010–11
FA Premier League Player of the Month: December 2009
PFA Player of the Month: March 2010
Guerin d'Oro: 2014, 2015
Juventus Player of the Season: 2013–14, 2014–15
Serie A team of the Year: 2013–14, 2014–15
UEFA Europa League Team of the Season: 2013–14
Serie A Footballer of the Year: 2014–15
(*shared with Dimitar Berbatov)
