Marcell Jansen (German pronunciation: [maʁˈsɛl ˈjansən]; born 4 November 1985) is a retired German footballer. He was well known for his accurate crossing and pace, despite his tall stature. He played primarily as a left back and can even play as a striker or left-winger, which indicates his versatility.
Joining Borussia Mönchengladbach from local SV Mönchengladbach in 1993, Jansen was already capped various times for Germany on youth level when then Mönchengladbach manager Ewald Lienen appointed him to act as an unused substitute in a Bundesliga fixture of the club against Hannover 96 (0–2) in September 2003. Ironically that remained Ewald Lienen's final game in charge of Mönchengladbach and Jansen had to go on playing for the U-19 of the club. The start of the 2004–05 season saw the player gaining senior status, getting his games with the U-23 of the club in the fourth German division under manager Horst Köppel. A change of manager in Mönchengladbach's professional squad saw Dick Advocaat taking charge and soon after the Dutchman relied on Jansen, giving the left-footed defender the opportunity to debut in Mönchengladbach's first team in an away fixture at Hertha BSC (0–6) in December 2004. When the result turned out to become a disaster in the second-half, Jansen even caused a foul inside the box, resulting in a penalty. However, Dick Advocaat kept faith in him despite this rather uninspiring debut. An injury that sidelined Mönchengladbach's skipper Christian Ziege in winter training worked out Jansen's big first-team opportunity. A string of impressive performances later he was even able to keep newly signed Belgian international Filip Daems (Ziege's proposed replacement) off the starting berth on left-back and enjoyed a bright debut season in the professional game, winning a key role for the German U21 as well. After making 9 nine appearances for Mönchengladbach, Jansen scored his first goal in a 2–2 draw against VfL Bochum.
His second season in the professional game worked out to be an even bigger success for Jansen. Helping his club to a comfortable season without any relegation fear, Jansen signed a new three-year deal with Mönchengladbach after several big European sides had begun to scout him extensively then.
Jansen moved in July 2007 to Bayern Munich for a fee of about €10 million. Following his move to Munich, Jansen made his Bayern Munich debut in a friendly match coming on for Philipp Lahm on a 46th minutes in a 4–0 win over Swiss side FC Schaffhausen and scored his first and only goal for Bayern Munich in the friendly match in a 13–0 win over FC 07 Albstadt. Jansen made his debut in a Bayern Munich shirt on the opening day of the season 2007–08 in a 3–0 win over Hansa Rostock. His time at Bayern Munich who was hampered by an ankle injury which put him out of action for three months in his first season as he did not play much for Bayern Munich. In his second season, Jansen found himself on the bench for Bayern's opening two matches of the new Bundesliga campaign after Jürgen Klinsmann criticized Jansen's performance in the Euro 2008 tournament. Jansen made 17 Bundesliga, ten UEFA Cup and three DFB Cup appearances for the club.
On 28 August 2008, Hamburg announced the signing of Jansen for a fee of €8 million. Two days after his move, Jansen made his debut for Hamburg in a 4–2 win over Arminia Bielefeld. On 7 December 2008, Jansen scored his first goal for Hamburg in a 2–1 win over 1. FC Köln. It was his first goal in the league since his time at Borussia Mönchengladbach. At Hamburg, his primary role is a left winger and he began to be in the attacking position. In June 2012 he extended his contract with HSV until June 2015. At the end of the season, Hamburg decided not to give Jansen a contract extension.
Being a free agent, Jansen could not take on a new club as he believed Hamburg was the only team for him. Many criticised his actions, believing he made a wrong decision as he announced his retirement from the game at the age of 29.
Jansen previously played for Germany at under-21 level and was called up to the senior side for a friendly against Slovakia on 3 September 2005 in Bratislava. He made his debut in that match, coming on as a half-time substitute for Thomas Hitzlsperger as Germany lost 2–0. After appearing in further internationals for Germany, Jansen was subsequently named in the final 23-man German squad for the 2006 World Cup. He initially started out as first-choice on the left with usual left back Philipp Lahm being moved to right back to accommodate him. After some below-par performances prior to the tournament, Klinsmann benched him and put Lahm in at left back again. With Lahm in good form, Jansen was restricted to only one appearance throughout the tournament, Germanys bronze medal winning match against Portugal.
He eventually earned a recall for several Euro 2008 qualifiers, including the 6–0 hammering of San Marino, in which he scored his first international goal. He was part of Joachim Löw's squad for the main tournament, and after playing the full 90 minutes in the 2–0 win against first group opponent Poland, he was then benched in Germanys 2–1 loss in the second group game against Croatia, and only came on as a substitute against Portugal in the quarter final, against Turkey in the semi final and in Germanys 1–0 loss against Spain in the final.
Jansen was injured prior to the World Cup in South Africa, but he was still called up by Löw for Germany's squad. He came on as substitute in the matches against Ghana, Argentina and Spain. He played in the starting lineup and scored in the 3–2 2010 World Cup third place win for Germany against Uruguay.
Germany's first competitive game after the World Cup, a 1–0 win in a Euro 2012 qualifying match against Belgium was his last international appearance. In early September 2010, Jansen played in the first match in the qualifying for Euro 2012 in Brussels against Belgium. In October 2010, he was nominated for the games in the qualifiers against Turkey and Kazakhstan, but had to cancel due to injury. As a result, he received almost three years no invitation and thus was not in the German squad for the UEFA Euro 2012. On 24 March 2013, he again received an invitation for the German national team, when he was re-nominated for the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification match against Kazakhstan. On 26 March 2013, he appeared as a substitute in this game in stoppage time for Marco Reus. He played on 15 November 2013 in a friendly match at the Giuseppe Meazza Stadium in Milan against Italy and four days later at 1–0 win in the friendly match at Wembley Stadium in London against England.
On 5 March 2014, he stood in a friendly match in the Mercedes-Benz-Arena in Stuttgart against Chile in the starting eleven and was injured in the 28th minute and replaced by Marcel Schmelzer. On 8 May 2014, Jansen was, although had a long injury break, nominated for the preliminary World Cup squad. Six days later, however, he was removed from the provisional squad.
Bayern Munich
Bundesliga: 2007–08
DFB-Pokal: 2007–08
DFL-Ligapokal: 2007
Germany
FIFA World Cup Third Place: 2006, 2010
UEFA European Football Championship Runner-up: 2008
FIFA Confederations Cup Third Place: 2005
As of 27 December 2015
