Magnus Norman (born 30 May 1976 in Filipstad) is a retired Swedish professional tennis player who was runner-up at the 2000 French Open and ranked briefly as World No. 2. He won 12 singles titles, including the 2000 Tennis Masters Series tournament in Rome, Italy.
Today, he coaches Stan Wawrinka, owns a tennis academy called the Good to Great Tennis Academy and also plays bandy, a sport he played in his youth before deciding to concentrate on tennis.
As a junior Norman posted a singles win/loss record of 46–24.
Norman reached his career-high singles ranking of World No. 2 in June 2000. This ranking resulted from his success during the first half of the year: he reached the semifinals of the 2000 Australian Open, won the Rome Masters, beating Gustavo Kuerten of Brazil, and was the runner-up at the French Open, where he defeated Thierry Guardiola, Fabrice Santoro, Sargis Sargsian, Andriy Medvedev, Marat Safin and Franco Squillari before Kuerten took revenge in the final. His decline began late that year at the Sydney Olympics, when he lost in the third round to Frenchman Arnaud di Pasquale in straight sets (di Pasquale went on to win the bronze medal).
Norman underwent corrective surgery for a heart valve condition in 1998. In the same year he had a key role in Sweden's Davis Cup victory. He retired due to hip and knee injuries in 2004.
Since retiring as a player, Norman has had considerable success as a coach. He started working with former doubles partner Thomas Johansson in the latter stages of Johansson's career, during which time he reached the Wimbledon semi-finals and won two ATP titles. After this, Norman began coaching Robin Söderling who under his wing reached consecutive French Open finals in 2009 and 2010, won the Paris Masters in 2010 and reached a career-high world number four before suffering injuries and glandular fever that have hampered his career since. More recently, Norman began a partnership with Stan Wawrinka who has since won two grand slams, the 2014 Australian Open and 2015 French Open, ending significant losing streaks against Rafael Nadal and Novak Djokovic in the process (as well as earning previously rare wins over compatriot Roger Federer) and reached world number three.
Norman teamed up with fellow former Swedish tennis players Mikael Tillström and Nicklas Kulti to run the Good to Great Tennis Academy, which has had among its students Wawrinka and rising Bulgarian star Grigor Dimitrov.
He is right-handed. Norman grew up playing bandy. His brother Marcus is the Secretary General of the Swedish Bandy Association. He briefly dated Swiss tennis player Martina Hingis.
Wins (12)
Runners-up (1)
A = did not participate in the tournament.
LQ = lost in the qualifying draw.
SR = the ratio of the number of singles tournaments won to the number of those tournaments played.
