The Denmark national handball team is the national handball team of Denmark. Controlled by the Danish Handball Association it represents Denmark in international matches. They are the team with most medals won in European Championship history on the men's side with a total of six medals, those being two gold medals (2008, 2012), one silver (2014) and three bronze medals (2002, 2004 & 2006).
Handball is one of the most popular pastimes in Denmark, only exceeded by e.g. football. At the end of 2003 the Danish Handball Association had more than 146,000 active and passive members.
In 2007 Denmark participated in the World Championship in Germany, where they were pitted in Group E against Angola, Hungary and their neighbors to the north Norway. Denmark finished second in their group following victories against Angola and Norway. In the main round the team faced Croatia, Czech Republic, Russia, Hungary and defending champions Spain.
Despite an initial defeat against Croatia, the team advanced by defeating their last three opponents. In the quarterfinal Iceland was defeated by the narrowest of margins, 42-41. In the semifinal Denmark lost to Poland 36-33 and ended up in the bronze match against France where they won 34-27 thus placing third.
Denmark's pivot Michael V. Knudsen was added to the All Star Team of the tournament.
After finishing 3rd in three consecutive European Championships, the Danish team won gold at the 2008 European Men's Handball Championship, which took place in neighboring Norway. The team lost only one match on the way to the gold, that being a fiercely contested derby against hosts Norway. The Danish team defeated Croatia 24-20 in the final, after inching out Germany in the semis. Keeper Kasper Hvidt and winger Lars Christiansen were important factors in the Danish campaign, both being selected for the tournament all-star team and Lars Christiansen also finishing as shared top goalscorer.
As defending champions, Denmark was a favorite to reclaim the title. However, they didn't succeed, losing matches to both Iceland and Croatia. In stead of advancing to the main-round Denmark ended up playing for 5th place against Spain. They won the placement match 34-27.
At The 2011 World Men's Handball Championship, after winning 9 matches in a row, Denmark reached the final beating Spain 28:24 in the semi-final. This was the first time in over 44 years, that the Denmark National Handball Team reached a World Championship final. In the final, Denmark lost against France 35:37 in overtime. This meant at the time, that France was able to hold all three major titles as reigning European Champions, Olympic Champions and also double World Champions.
Denmark came to the 2012 European Men's Handball Championship as vice World Champions and as one of the pre-favorites to win the tournament. However, in the main group, Denmark lost to both Serbia and Poland, proceeding to the main round with zero points, having only won against Slovakia. This meant that Denmark had to win all of their matches and at the same time, they had to rely on other results in order to advance to the semi-finals. Miraculously, results from other matches were in favor of Denmark. The destiny of Denmark's survival lay in the hands of Poland as Poland had to win against Germany in order to sustain Denmark's survival in the tournament. After a fierce and close match between Poland and Germany, Poland won 33-32. This meant that Denmark only had to beat Sweden in their final main round match, and they would go through to the semi-finals. Denmark beat Sweden by a large margin, 31-24, making handball history along the way, becoming the first team ever, both on the men's and women's side in European Championship history to advance to the semi-finals having carried zero points into the main round.
Like the 2011 World Men's Handball Championship, Denmark met Spain in the semi-finals, a match Denmark won 25-24. In the other semi-final, hosting nation Serbia met Croatia, a match Serbia won 26-22.
In a low scoring match, Denmark won their second European Championship title after beating Serbia 21-19 in the final, thus becoming the first handball team ever claiming the European Championship title having carried zero points into the main round.
Despite having disappointed at the 2012 Olympics in London, Denmark was still among the top teams to win the World Champions title. As defending European Champions, Denmark was seated with Russia, Iceland, Macedonia, Qatar and Chile in Group B. Winning all of their matches, they advanced safely to the 16th round where they had to meet Tunisia. Having no problems defeating Tunisia with the score of 30-23, Denmark reached the Quarterfinals where Hungary awaited. After a splendid first half, leading 18-11, the second half was a more close affair, though Denmark managed to win 28-26, reaching the semi-finals for the second consecutive time in this tournament. In the semi-finals, Denmark was seated with Croatia who had beaten the defending World Champions, France, in their semi-final. Though the odds where in favor of Croatia, Denmark played their best match in the 2013 World Championship so far, winning 30-24 and securing their second consecutive World Championship final.
In the final, Denmark was up against hosting nation, Spain. The final became a horrendous game for Denmark, losing with a record-breaking 16 goals, and losing the title for the second time in a row, with Spain declared as winner of the tournament for the second time in history.
As vice world champions, defending European Champions and the advantage of home court, Denmark were among the favorites to win the tournament. They won all of the matches in the preliminary round as well as the main round easily advancing to the semi-finals. Denmark met Croatia in the semi-final. They beat Croatia, 29-27, but lost to the French national team in the finals, losing 41-32. This was the second time in a row, that Denmark lost a Championship, losing to Spain at the 2013 World Championship.
     Champions       Runners-up       Third Place       Fourth Place  
The team did not participate in the 1936 field handball tournament at the Olympics, but lost at the 1952 Olympics in a demonstration match against Sweden.
*Denotes draws include knockout matches decided in a penalty shootout.
*Denotes draws include knockout matches decided in a penalty shootout.
**Gold background color indicates that the tournament was won. Red border color indicates tournament was held on home soil.
This is the squad for the Handball at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men's qualification.
Head coach: Guðmundur Guðmundsson
Matches and goals are correct as of 31 January 2016.
Between 2004 and 2006, Denmark's kits were supplied by Adidas. They were replaced by Puma in 2007 and have since supplied Denmark's kits to today.
