The 2012 Arab Cup (Arabic: كأس العرب 2012‎‎) was the tenth edition of the Arab Nations Cup, also referred to as the Arab Cup for national football teams affiliated with the Union of Arab Football Associations (UAFA).
The tournament was hosted by Saudi Arabia between 22 June and 6 July 2012. It is the second time that the nation has hosted the tournament, the first being in 1985. This edition witnessed the return of Iraq – the most successful team and record holder of the Arab Nations Cup with four titles – after a 25-year absence due to the Gulf War.
The tournament's lead sponsor was Singaporean company World Sport Group who describe themselves as "Asia's leading sports marketing, media and event management company."
The winner received USD$1million, the runner-up will receive $600,000, the third placed team will receive $300,000, while the other participating football associations will receive $200,000 each.
Bold indicates champion for that year
1Libya were due to send their under-21 team but instead sent its senior national team.
The official draw was held on 6 May 2012 in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. The remaining 11 teams were ranked based on the FIFA World Rankings of May 2012 before the draw.
The United Arab Emirates withdrew from the competition after the group draw had been made; they were initially drawn into group A.
It will be played as tournament with three groups made of four teams each. The organizer country, Saudi Arabia was assigned to Group A.
The team that finish highest of all group runners-up will also proceed to the semi-final stage. Due to Group A only having three teams in their group, results against teams finishing fourth will not be counted. The best runners-up will face the winner of group A in the semifinals while the winner of group B will face the winner of group C.
The semi-final winners proceed to the final and those who lost compete in the third place playoff.
6 goals
3 goals
2 goals
1 goal
Own goal
 Waleed Al Hayam (playing against Morocco)
 Yassine Salhi – was named the player of the tournament, and was the top scorer of the tournament with a total of 6 goals.
Team(s) rendered in italics represent(s) the host nation(s). The competition's winning team is rendered in bold.(1) – Total games lost not counted in total games played (total games lost = total games won)(2) – Total number of games drawn (tied) for all teams = Total number of games drawn (tied) ÷ 2 (both teams involved)
