Anthony Bernard Carter (born June 16, 1975) is an American basketball coach and former player who used to be an assistant coach for the Sacramento Kings of the National Basketball Association (NBA).
Born in Atlanta, Carter played as a freshman on the varsity team of Alonzo A. Crim High School in Atlanta. However, after his freshman year, Carter quit high school. After leaving school, Carter spent his teenage years playing basketball for money in Atlanta. The Rocky Mountain News quoted Carter stating: "The dope man would put up the money, and we would play. We used to play for the drug dealers. That's how we were going to make our money. We didn't sell the drugs ... (I used the money) to buy shoes and food. That was the only way we could eat." During his teenage years, Carter's mother was on drugs, and all seven of his uncles were at one point in prison.
Realizing Carter's basketball skills could earn him an education, several members of Carter's community helped him get a GED and enroll in college.
Carter played collegiately at Saddleback Community College in Mission Viejo, California (1994–96), then went on to play at the University of Hawaii. At UH, Carter became the Rainbows’ career leader in assist average and one of only 10 players to reach 1,000 points.
After going undrafted in the 1998 NBA draft, he began his NBA career with the Miami Heat, after having spent one season with CBA's Yakima Sun Kings.
In 2003, his agent misread a part of his contract which would have enabled him to get an extension, and more money, with Miami but it was too late as he had already signed a contract with the San Antonio Spurs which completely voided his rookie contract (the agent was subsequently fired). However, after only five games, the Spurs waived him due to injury, and he remained inactive throughout 2003-04.
After two relatively obscure seasons with the Minnesota Timberwolves (2004–06), on April 12, 2007, the Denver Nuggets signed Carter for the remainder of the season, after he started the year with Italy's Scafati Basket. He was waived by the team on August 29, and re-signed two days later.
On December 20, 2007, Carter hit a runner in the lane with 0.8 seconds left in double overtime against the Houston Rockets, which gave the Nuggets a 112-111 win. In that season, he broke every individual statistic record, averaging a career-high 8 ppg, while starting all but three of the games he appeared in, while recording an impressive 28 blocked shots for the season.
On July 1, 2008, Carter became a free agent, but would quickly re-sign with Denver in October.
On August 14, 2009 the Nuggets again resigned Carter to a one-year contract for $1.3 million.
On July 14, 2010, he re-signed with the Nuggets to a one-year contract worth $1.3 million.
On February 22, 2011, Carter was traded to the New York Knicks in a three-way blockbuster deal which also involved Minnesota Timberwolves that brought Carmelo Anthony to New York. Considered a throw-in in the trade, Carter forever cemented his place in Knicks lore when he nearly singlehandedly rallied New York to a playoff victory in an elimination game against the Boston Celtics on April 24, 2011. Carter substituted into the match with the Knicks trailing by 23 and brought life back to the Garden by suffocating Rajon Rondo on defense, scoring 11 points, and dishing four dimes. However, the Knicks comeback bid ultimately fell short.
On December 12, 2011, Carter signed with the Toronto Raptors. He was waived by the Raptors on March 15, 2012. In October 2012, he re-joined the Denver Nuggets for their training camp, but did not make the team's final roster.
In September 2013, Carter was named an assistant coach with the Austin Spurs of the NBA D-League.
On July 31, 2015, he was hired by the Sacramento Kings to be an assistant coach.
While Carter was in fifth grade at Atlanta's Fred A. Toomer Elementary School, his class was adopted by the "I Have a Dream" foundation. In 2003, he was appointed as the first-ever spokesperson for the foundation.
Carter donated $100,000 to fund scholarships at the University of Hawaii.
