Lega Pro Seconda Divisione was the fourth highest football league in Italy, the lowest with a professional status. Usually it consisted of 36 teams, but in the season 2011–12 the teams were 41 divided geographically into two divisions of 20, 21. Group A covers northern and north central Italy, Group B south central and southern Italy.
Until the season 2007–08 the league was known as Serie C2.
Before the 1978–79 season there were only three professional football leagues in Italy, the third being Serie C. In 1978, it was decided to split Serie C into Serie C1 (the third highest league) and Serie C2. Upon its inception in 1978–79, Serie C2 consisted of four divisions, however, that number was reduced to three from the start of the 1991–92 season. The reform, already decided by the FIGC lead to the reunification with the first division starting from 2014-2015 and with the subsequent rebirth of the third tier championship organized by the pro league with 60 teams divided into three groups of 20.
During the regular season, teams only played the other teams in their division. Each opponent was played twice, once at home and once away, for a total of 34 matches. Games were scheduled such that in the first 17 matches, every opponent was played once. In the last 17 matches, the same opponents were played in the same order with the only difference being that the venue changed.
In each division, two teams are promoted to Lega Pro Prima Divisione, and three teams are relegated to Serie D. In total, the league promotes 6 teams to Prima Divisione and relegates 9 teams to Serie D.
The team finishing first in the regular season was directly promoted to Prima Divisione, while teams placing 2nd to 5th were entered into a play-off semi-final for the chance of gaining the second promotional spot for that particular division.
In the play-off phase that took place after the regular season was completed, in each division the team placed 2nd played the team placed 5th, and the team placed 3rd played the team placed 4th in two double-leg promotional semi-final series with the higher classified team having home field advantage in the second leg. In case of an aggregate tie score, the away goals rule was not used, and the higher classified team was declared the winner without extra time being played nor penalty kicks being taken. The winning teams advanced to the final in another double-leg series with similar rules. The only difference being that if an aggregate tie existed at the end of the second match, extra time was played. If the tie persisted, again the higher classified team was declared the winner and no penalty kicks were taken. The winner became the second team promoted for that particular division to Prima Divisione.
The team finishing last in the regular season was directly relegated to Serie D, while teams placing 14th to 17th were entered into a play-out. There was only one round in the play-outs. In each division the team placed 14th played the team placed 17th, and the team placed 15th played the team placed 16th in a double-leg series with the higher classified team having home field advantage in the second leg. In case of an aggregate tie score, the rules were exactly the same as those for the promotional semi-finals. The two winning teams remained in Seconda Divisione while the two losing teams became the second and third teams relegated for that particular division.
The promotions in Lega Pro Prima Divisione were in all six: two for each group, as the previous seasons.
Instead the relegations in Serie D were in all four: two for the group A and one for each of the other two groups.
In the group A of 17 teams were relegated the 17th and the 15th after the loser in the relegation playout between the 16th place.
In the group B and C of 16 teams, were relegated the 16th, with only one team being relegated from each of those divisions.
In those seasons there were two groups instead of three in the previous.
The promotions in Lega Pro Prima Divisione were in all six: three for each group. The relegations in Serie D were in all nine: the last three teams in the regular season, plus one relegation play-out loser from each division and the loser of the final play-out between the two winners of the semifinals, were relegated to Serie D.
In the 2013–14 season eighteen teams (the top eight and the relegation playout winner in each division) were promoted. No promotion playoffs were played. Eighteen teams (the bottom six plus three playout losers in each division) were relegated.
Italian football league system