The 1995–96 Bundesliga was the 33rd season of the Bundesliga, Germany's premier football league. It began on 11 August 1995 and ended on 18 May 1996. Borussia Dortmund were the defending champions.
Every team played two games against each other team, one at home and one away. This was the first season where teams received three points for a win (instead of two), and one point for a draw. If two or more teams were tied on points, places were determined by goal difference and, if still tied, by goals scored. The team with the most points were crowned champions while the three teams with the least points were relegated to 2. Bundesliga.
VfL Bochum and MSV Duisburg were relegated to the 2. Bundesliga after finishing in 16th and 17th place respectively. Dynamo Dresden, who ended the season in last place, were denied a professional license by the DFB and thus relegated to the third-tier Regionalliga. All demoted teams were replaced by 2. Bundesliga sides F.C. Hansa Rostock, FC St. Pauli and Fortuna Düsseldorf.
Bayer 05 Uerdingen were renamed KFC Uerdingen 05 due to the retreat of main sponsor Bayer.
Source: www.dfb.de
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1As Hansa Rostock did not apply for the UEFA Intertoto Cup, their place was transferred to Stuttgart.2After being demoted by league place, Kaiserslautern won the DFB-Pokal 1995–96 and thus qualified for the Cup Winners' Cup.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Source: www.dfb.de
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
17 goals
 Fredi Bobic (VfB Stuttgart)
16 goals
 Sean Dundee (Karlsruher SC)
 Giovane Élber (VfB Stuttgart)
 Jürgen Klinsmann (FC Bayern Munich)
15 goals
 Martin Dahlin (Borussia Mönchengladbach)
 Michael Zorc (Borussia Dortmund)
14 goals
 Olaf Bodden (TSV 1860 Munich)
 Harald Spörl (Hamburger SV)
11 goals
 Mario Basler (SV Werder Bremen)
 Stefan Beinlich (F.C. Hansa Rostock)
 Harry Decheiver (SC Freiburg)
 Martin Max (FC Schalke 04)
 Erik Meijer (KFC Uerdingen 05)
 Toni Polster (1. FC Köln)
