Juventus Stadium, sometimes simply known in Italy as the Stadium, is an all-seater football stadium in the Vallette borough of Turin, Italy, and the home of Serie A club Juventus Football Club. The stadium was built on the site of Juventus' and Torino's former home, the Stadio delle Alpi, and is one of only three club-owned football stadiums in Serie A, alongside Sassuolo's Mapei Stadium and Udinese's Stadio Friuli. It was opened at the start of the 2011–12 season and has a capacity of just over 41,000 spectators. The stands are just 7.5 metres from the pitch, a major improvement from the Stadio delle Alpi. The distance between the last row of the grand stand and the pitch is 49 metres.
Juventus played the first match against the world's oldest professional football club Notts County on 8 September 2011 in a friendly which ended 1–1. Veteran striker Luca Toni found the net after Fabio Quagliarella failed to convert a penalty. The first official competitive match was Juventus–Parma, played on 11 September 2011, where Stephan Lichtsteiner scored the stadium's first goal in the 16th minute.
The stadium hosted the 2014 UEFA Europa League Final.
Juventus' previous permanent home ground, the Stadio delle Alpi, was completed in 1990 to host matches for the 1990 World Cup. The club's move from their previous ancestral home, the Stadio Comunale, to the Stadio delle Alpi was controversial. The new stadium was built at a great expense, was relatively less accessible, and had poor sightlines due to the athletics track. Despite Juventus being the best-supported team in Italy (with the highest television subscribers and away section attendances), attendance at the Stadio delle Alpi was dismal. Average attendance was only a third of the stadium's 67,000 capacity. The club bought the stadium from the local council in 2003, a decision which was popular with fans.
Juventus moved out of the unpopular stadium in 2006 and began plans to build a more intimate and atmospheric venue. During that period, they played their matches at the newly renovated Stadio Olimpico, which was also unpopular due to its low capacity. In November 2008, the club unveiled plans for a new 41,000-seater stadium on the site of the Stadio delle Alpi. The new stadium, built at a cost of €100 million (£90 million), features modern executive boxes, among other new developments. The completion of Juventus Stadium made Juventus the only Serie A club to build and own their stadium at the time. Then-club president Giovanni Cobolli Gigli described the stadium as "a source of great pride".
The financing of the project was contributed by the advanced payment from Sportfive for €35 million, a loan of €50 million (later increased to €60 million) from Istituto per il Credito Sportivo, and a land sales to Nordiconad for €20.25 million.
The construction project aimed to ensure a low environmental impact of the work of the construction site via the use of advanced environmentally sustainable technologies. This stadium is constructed to reduce energy consumption from non-renewable energy sources by reducing waste and optimising the resources available. The stadium can produce the electricity it needs using solar energy captured through photovoltaic panels; it produces warm water which heats rooms, changing rooms, kitchens and the football field through a network of district heating, heats hot water for the dressing rooms and kitchens of restaurants using solar thermal systems. These alternative energy sources are aimed at helping the stadium meet the criteria dictated by the Kyoto protocol by generating multiple results:
Reductions of greenhouse gases
No air pollution
No risk of fire
Integration with district heating
Containment of waste
Intensive exploitation of solar energy through solar tracker tools
No production of chemical or acoustic emissions
Reuse of rainwater
Reduction of at least 50% of water needed for irrigation of the field
All the concrete from the old Stadio delle Alpi demolition have been separated and reused for the new building; other materials left have been divided into types, to be recycled, resold or reused throughout the new stadium's construction. The reinforced concrete used for the steps has been crushed down and reused as a supporting layer of the soil, with almost 40,000 m3 (52,000 cu yd) of concrete put towards the construction of the new stadium's foundations. Around 6,000 tons of steel, aluminium and copper were recovered, the re-use of which provided savings of more than one million euros. The implementation of this sustainable construction policy has ensured a global savings of approximately €2.3 million.
Juventus signed an agreement with Sportfive Italia which gave the company "exclusive naming and partial promotional and sponsorship rights for the new stadium". In the agreement, Sportfive was given the rights to the name of the stadium from 2011 to 2023 for €75 million and to market the sky boxes and VIP seats.
The opening ceremony of the stadium was held on 8 September 2011, with a historical exhibition match against Notts County. The choice of opposition is due to Juve's historical links with Notts County as their now-iconic black and white stripes were inspired by County's jersey colours. The game ended 1–1 with goals from Luca Toni and Lee Hughes coming in the second half. In return, Notts County have extended an invitation to Juventus for a return match at Meadow Lane in 2012 to celebrate County's 150th anniversary.
The stadium includes 3,600 premium seats and 64 sky boxes. Services for the club include reserved entrance to the stadium, luxury armchairs with personal LCD televisions, exclusive restaurants, bars, lounges, finger food at half time and after the game, reserved parking, access to the museum (starting in 2012).
The Juventus Premium Club is the Juventus corporate hospitality project, aimed at to companies who wish to entertain their clients and partners to lunch or dinner at the Juventus stadium before the match.
In addition, the stadium houses a 34,000-m2 shopping complex open every day and parking space for 4,000 vehicles. The Juventus Museum is located nearby.
A 70-minute guided tour of the stadium is offered every day. Guests are taken around to see the dressing rooms, facilities, museum and the pitch. The tours were initiated in November 2011 and the first tour was led by former Juventus player and current board member Pavel Nedvěd. Audio guides are also available to foreign visitors in English, French, German and Spanish.
On 27 October 2011, Area 12, a shopping centre adjacent to the stadium was opened. It has over 60 shops, two bars, three restaurants and the first E.Leclerc-Conad hypermarket to feature a drive-through service, allowing customers to do their shopping online and collect their pre-packed goods. The new Juventus Store, at 550 square metres, is the biggest sports club shop in the country. It was designed by Giugiaro and architect Alberto Rolla.
The shopping centre has 2,000 parking spaces, of which 800 are covered, and was provided by San Sisto (sole owner), a company which sees the agreement between Nordiconad from Modena, the Northern Italy Cooperative of Gruppo Conad, Cmb from Carpi (MO) and Unieco from Reggio Emilia, two Italian companies in the field of shopping centre building.
The Juventus Museum, called the J-Museum, was unveiled on 16 May 2012 by club president Andrea Agnelli and museum chairman Paolo Gamberti and opened to the public the following day. A noted feature is the extensive use of technology to provide a different approach to the traditional concept of a museum. The museum is chaired by noted Italian journalist Paolo Garimberti, who was previously a journalist and correspondent for La Stampa, La Repubblica and CNN Italia.
The museum has been a popular point of interest with visitors to the stadium. Just four months after opening to the public, it has recorded some 40,000 visitors. In November 2012, the museum's management announced a partnership with two popular local attractions, the National Museum of Cinema and Reggia di Venaria, to offer a discounted ticket package for visitors.
On 23 March 2016, Juventus introduced its new medical centre, J-Medical. The medical centre is situated in the stadium’s east stand, next to J-Museum. J-Medical was devised by Juventus and Santa Clara Group, in order to serve the Juventus community and also provide health care to residence. It offers medical treatment, clinical procedures and diagnostic tools, all housed within a 3500 square meters facility with outdoor areas for rehabilitation. On 13 June 2016, Miralem Pjanić completed his medical ahead of a proposed move from Roma. This was the first time that J-Medical had held routine check-ups for prospective Juventus players.
Juventus Stadium hosted the Stadium Business Awards held in May 2012.
On 20 March 2012, UEFA announced that the Juventus Stadium would host the 2014 UEFA Europa League Final. This was the first time the city of Turin hosted a final of a UEFA club competition. The hosts ended up being eliminated in the semi-finals by Portuguese side Benfica 2–1.
On 1 June 2010 Juventus acquired a 99-year leasehold on the 270,860 m² Continassa area (50 years for some minor parties) from the Turin city council for €1 million with the aim to redevelop over ten years with a series of projects and an investment of at least €60 million. The agreement was initially announced on 15 March 15, 2011 and signed by the end of 2011. 
The project includes, among others, the construction of the future headquarters of the club – which will be built in the Continassa, the club has pledged to construct a Juventus Soccer School (the school football team Juventus) and will also build hotels. On 22 December 2012, the master plan of the whole Continassa area was approved by the city council of Turin.
On 14 June 2013, a final contract was signed for €11.7 million, which Juventus acquired a 99-year renewable lease hold of 180,000 square metre of area, while the city council retained some area in Continassa. On 22 July 2014 Piano Esecutivo Convenzionato proposed by Juventus was approved.
On 16 October 2015, Juventus officially announced the new project of J-Village. It reformed previous Continassa Project and continued development in Continassa area. J-Village comprised development of six sites: the JTC (Juventus Training Center), the first-team training facility which would also house the Media Center; the new Juventus Head Office; the J-Hotel; the ISE International School (part of J-College  ); the Concept Store. A Power Station and the service infrastructure for the whole area would complete the development. The operational plan was expected for the completion by the end of June 2017. 
The J-Village Property Fund was managed by Accademia SGR S.p.A.. The Fund's overall investment was above €100 million, entirely covered by various private investors which were handled by Accademia SGR S.p.A. for a total of € 53.8 million, and financing granted by UBI Banca S.c.p.A.(50%) and UniCredit S.p.A.(50%), for a maximum of € 64.5 million. Juventus ceded to the J-Village fund ownership of the development rights over an area of approximately 148,700 square meters and the related planning permission for 34,830 square meters of Gross Floor Surface at a total value of €24.1 million. Therefore, Juventus received shares in the J-Village Fund worth €24.1 million and be a Fund shareholder. 
