The 1987 Mexican Grand Prix was a Formula One motor race held at Autodromo Hermanos Rodriguez on October 18, 1987. It was the fourteenth round of the 1987 Formula One season. It was the 11th Mexican Grand Prix and the second since the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez was renovated and returned to the World Championship calendar.
The race was held over a total of 63 laps of the four kilometre circuit for a race distance of 279 kilometres. The race was unintentionally divided into two heats after British driver Derek Warwick crashed his Arrows A10 heavily exiting the high-speed Peraltada corner on lap 31. The results of the first 30 laps were combined with the results of the second race of 33 laps to create a combined result.
The race was won by British driver Nigel Mansell driving a Williams FW11B. Mansell's combined time over the 63 laps was 26 seconds faster than his Brazilian team mate and eventual 1987 World Champion, Nelson Piquet. Piquet actually took the chequered flag first at the end of the second heat, but Mansell's lead over Piquet at the time of Warwick's accident was substantially larger. Piquet had been delayed after a collision with Alain Prost (McLaren MP4/3) in the early running.
It was Mansell's sixth and last Grand Prix victory for the 1987 season. Riccardo Patrese finished third driving a Brabham BT56. It was Patrese's best result since finishing third in the 1984 Italian Grand Prix. It was just the second podium of the year for Brabham. Brabham would only score one more podium before it would fold in 1992.
Attrition bit heavily into the race with just fifteen cars taking the second race start. Nine survived to the finish. Naturally aspirated Jim Clark Trophy cars climbed into the points with Philippe Alliot (Lola LC87) taking his third top six result for the year.
Mansell's victory allowed him to close to within twelve points of his championship leading team mate. With just two races left, only the Williams drivers had enough points to win the championship.
Note: Only the top five positions are included for all four sets of standings.
Numbers in brackets refer to positions of normally aspirated entrants competing for the Jim Clark Trophy.
