The 1984–85 Bundesliga was the 22nd season of the Bundesliga, the premier football league in West Germany. It began on 24 August 1984 and ended on 8 June 1985. VfB Stuttgart were the defending champions.
Every team played two games against each other team, one at home and one away. Teams received two points for a win and one point for a draw. If two or more teams were tied on points, places were determined by goal difference and, if still tied, by goals scored. The team with the most points were crowned champions while the two teams with the least points were relegated to 2. Bundesliga. The third-to-last team had to compete in a two-legged relegation/promotion play-off against the third-placed team from 2. Bundesliga.
Kickers Offenbach and 1. FC Nuremberg were directly relegated to the 2. Bundesliga after finishing in the last two places. They were replaced by Karlsruher SC and FC Schalke 04. Relegation/promotion play-off participant Eintracht Frankfurt won on aggregate against MSV Duisburg and thus retained their Bundesliga status.
^1 Waldhof Mannheim played their matches in nearby Ludwigshafen because their own ground did not fulfil Bundesliga requirements.
Source: www.dfb.de
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Arminia Bielefeld and third-placed 2. Bundesliga team 1. FC Saarbrücken had to compete in a two-legged relegation/promotion play-off. Saarbrücken won 3–1 on aggregate and thus were promoted to the Bundesliga.
Source: www.dfb.de
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
26 goals
 Klaus Allofs (1. FC Köln)
25 goals
 Rudi Völler (SV Werder Bremen)
19 goals
 Karl Allgöwer (VfB Stuttgart)
 Thomas Allofs (1. FC Kaiserslautern)
18 goals
 Siegfried Reich (Arminia Bielefeld)
 Klaus Täuber (FC Schalke 04)
17 goals
 Günter Thiele (Fortuna Düsseldorf)
16 goals
 Klaus Fischer (VfL Bochum)
 Pierre Littbarski (1. FC Köln)
 Lothar Matthäus (FC Bayern Munich)
 Frank Mill (Borussia Mönchengladbach)
1984–85 2. Bundesliga
1984–85 DFB-Pokal
