The Asian Football Confederation (AFC) is the governing body of association football in Asia and Australia. It has 47 member countries, mostly located on the Asian and Australian continent but excluding all the transcontinental countries with territory in both Europe and Asia, which are members of UEFA (Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Cyprus, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkey). Israel is also a UEFA member even though it lies entirely in Asia. On the other hand, Australia, formerly in the OFC, joined the Asian Football Confederation in 2006, and the Oceanian island of Guam, a territory of the United States, is also a member of AFC, in addition to Northern Mariana Islands, one of the Two Commonwealths of the United States. Hong Kong and Macau, although not independent countries (both are Special administrative regions of China), are also members of the AFC.
One of FIFA's six continental confederations, the AFC was formed officially on 8 May 1954 in Manila, Philippines, on the sidelines of the second Asian Games. The main headquarters is located in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. The current president is Sheikh Salman Bin Ibrahim Al-Khalifa of Bahrain.
The Asian Football Confederation was founded on 8 May 1954. Afghanistan, Burma (Myanmar), Republic of China (Chinese Taipei), Hong Kong, India, Israel, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore and South Vietnam were founding members.
The Asian Ladies Football Confederation (ALFC) is the section of the AFC who manage women's football in Asia. The group was independently founded in April 1968 in a meeting involving Taiwan, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Singapore. In 1986 the ALFC merged with the AFC. The Asian Ladies Football Confederation helped organise the AFC Women's Asian Cup, first held in 1975, as well as the AFC's AFC U-19 Women's Championship and the AFC U-17 Women's Championship.
The AFC has 47 member associations split into five regions.
12 from West Asia
6 from Central Asia
7 from South Asia
10 from East Asia
12 from South East Asia
 Israel Football Association 1954–1974; joined UEFA in 1994 because they were excluded from AFC competitions, as a result of a proposal by Kuwait which was adopted by a vote of 17 to 13 with 6 abstentions.
 New Zealand Football 1964; founding member of OFC in 1966
 Football Federation of Kazakhstan 1992–2002; joined UEFA in 2002
The AFC runs the AFC Asian Cup and AFC Women's Asian Cup, which determine the Champions of Asia, as well as the AFC Solidarity Cup. All three competitions are held every four years. The AFC also organises the AFC Futsal Championship, AFC Beach Soccer Championship, various age-level international youth football tournaments and the Asian qualifying tournament for the FIFA World Cup, FIFA Women's World Cup and for football at the Summer Olympics.
In addition to the AFC run international tournaments, each AFC regional federation organises its own tournament for national teams: EAFF East Asian Cup, SAFF Championship, AFF Championship and WAFF Championship.
The top-ranked AFC competition is the AFC Champions League, which started in the 2002–03 season (an amalgamation of the Asian Champions Cup and the Asian Cup Winners Cup) and gathers the top 1–4 teams of each country (the number of teams depend on that country's ranking and can be upgraded or downgraded); this competition only gathered teams from top country.
A second, lower-ranked competition is the AFC Cup. This competition was launched by AFC in 2004. A third competition, the AFC President's Cup, which had started in 2005, was absorbed into the AFC Cup in 2015.
The AFC also runs an annual Asian futsal club competition, the AFC Futsal Club Championship.
The following are the sponsors of AFC (named "AFC Partners"):
Emirates
Nike
Nikon Corporation
Epson
Aramex
Kirin
Konica Minolta
Toshiba
TOTO
Asahi
Toyota
Saison Card
Samsung
Makita
ING
FamilyMart
Hyundai
 Harry Kewell
 Baichung Bhutia
 Homayoun Behzadi
 Ali Daei
 Yasuhiko Okudera
 Hong Myung-bo
 Soh Chin Aun
 Sami Al Jaber
 Sun Wen
 Homare Sawa
 Mokhtar Dahari
Legend
 1st  – Champion
 2nd  – Runner-up
 3rd  – Third place
 4th  – Fourth place
QF – Quarterfinals
R16 – Round of 16 (since 1986: knockout round of 16)
GS – Group stage (in the 1950, 1974, 1978, and 1982 tournaments, which had two group stages, this refers to the first group stage)
1S – First knockout stage (1934–1938 Single-elimination tournament)
 •  — Did not qualify
 ×  — Did not enter / withdrawn / banned / disqualified
    — Hosts
President
 Salman Bin Ibrahim Al-Khalifa 
Vice Presidents
 Zhang Jilong – First Vice President
 Saud Abdulaziz Al Mohannadi – Second Vice President
 Praful Patel – Third Vice President
 Winston Lee Boon Aun – Fourth Vice President
 Ali Kafashian – Fifth Vice President
FIFA Executive Committee Members
 Ahmed Al-Fahad Al-Ahmed Al-Sabah
 Abdullah Ibni Sultan Ahmad Shah
 Kozo Tashima
Members
 Faisal Saleh Hayat
 Richard Lai
 Moya Dodd
 Mahfuza Akhter Kiron
 Susan Shalabi Molano
 Han Un Gyong
 Mohammed Khalfan Al Romaithi
 Chung Mong-gyu
 Ahmed Eid S. Al Harbi
 Mariano Araneta Jr.
 Mohamed Shaweed
 Sardor Rakhmatullaev
 Hachem Sayed Ali Haidar
 Francisco Kalbuady Lay
 Zohra Mehri
General Secretary
Vacant
Deputy General Secretary
 Windsor John Paul
AFC Annual Awards
List of Presidents of AFC
Sport in Asia
Stadium Attendance of Association Football
