The International Swimming Hall of Fame and Museum (ISHOF) is a history museum and hall of fame, located at One Hall of Fame Drive, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, United States, operated by private interests and serving as the central point for the study of the history of swimming in the United States and around the world. Exhibits include ancient art and both reproductions and original art depicting famous moments in swimming history (from ancient times to modern), swimwear, and civil rights, as well as memorabilia and artifacts belonging to persons who have promoted or excelled in aquatics. It is recognized by FINA (Fédération Internationale de Natation) as the official hall for the aquatics sports.
In 1965 Johnny Weissmuller became the president of the International Swimming Hall of Fame, that with this charge in 1970 was present at the Commonwealth Games in Jamaica and was introduced to Queen Elizabeth. ISHOF was incorporated in Florida as a non-profit educational corporation on November 23, 1964, with Buck Dawson, as its first executive director. Nine months later—in August 1965—a 50-meter pool, 25-yard diving well, and warm-up pool were completed. This initial part of the Swimming Hall of Fame complex was dedicated on December 27, 1965, witnessed by 4,500 swimmers and other spectators from all fifty states and eleven foreign countries. In 1968, the then-Swimming Hall of Fame became the first world-recognized hall of fame in any sport, when the 105-nation FINA Congress met at the Summer Olympics in Mexico City and endorsed the hall of fame as an “International Swimming Hall of Fame”. On June 16, 1969, the organization’s Articles of Incorporation were amended to reflect that the name was changed to “International Swimming Hall of Fame”.
The Hall of Fame is dedicated to promoting the benefits of swimming as both an essential life skill and sport, through the operation of the World Museum of Swimming and by immortalizing the achievements and contributions of those who have distinguished themselves in the following six branches of aquatic sports:
competitive swimming,
water polo,
diving,
open water swimming (a.k.a. marathon swimming),
synchronized swimming and
masters
ISHOF inducts outstanding practitioners of these sports into the Hall of Fame as honorees in one of several categories:
Swimmer
Diver
Water Polo
Synchronized Swimmer
Open Water/Marathon Swimmer
Masters (adult) athlete
Coach
Contributor (to aquatics)
Pioneer
The first members of the hall of fame—a class of twenty-one—were inducted in 1965.
Aquatic Hall of Fame and Museum of Canada
List of Swimming World Swimmers of the Year
List of FINA Athletes of the Year
