The 2013 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A was the 57th edition of the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, the top-level of professional football in Brazil. Fluminense come in as the defending champions, having won the title in the 2012 season. On 13 November 2013, Cruzeiro won the title for the third time.
For the first time since the league adopted the 20-team, double round-robin format, all four teams promoted from Série B survived.
For the eleventh consecutive season, the tournament was played in a double round-robin system. In a fashion similar to its second title in 2003, Cruzeiro led the rankings for most of the tournament, declared champion in the fifth to last round. The bottom four teams, Fluminense, Vasco, Ponte Preta and Nautico were relegated to play in the Campeonato Brasileiro Série B in the 2014 season.
The tournament had a one-month interruption between June 9 and July 6 due to the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup, which took place in Brazil.
Although Portuguesa finished the championship just above the relegation positions, it was punished by the Superior Court of Sport Justice for irregularly calling in a player during a match against Grêmio - Héverton, who was suspended for a red card received at his previous Copa do Brasil match. With the punishment, the team lost four points - three for the irregular usage of a player and a fourth one which the team won due to the game resulting in a tie - and ended up being relegated. This way, Fluminense FC initially managed to finish the championship above the relegation positions and was spared from having to compete in the next year's second division for the third time on the last 2 decades. However, following an appeal in court by Daniel Neves, a ruling by Judge Marcello do Amaral Perino on 10 January 2014 reinstated the four points and they went down. This was because the Confederation failed to give sufficient notice that the player's suspension had been extended by one week. The ruling gave ten days for CBF to appeal.
The Série A served as a qualifier to CONMEBOL's 2014 Copa Libertadores. Cruzeiro and Gremio qualified to the Second Stage of the competition, while Atletico Paranaense qualified to the First Stage. Botafogo qualified to the First Stage as well since Ponte Preta lost the 2013 Copa Sudamericana Finals.
Source: Soccerway.com
Rules for classification: 1st points; 2nd wins; 3rd goal difference; 4th goals scored; 5th head-to-head results; 6th least red cards received; 7th least yellow cards received; 8th draw.1 Atlético Mineiro is qualified for the second stage of the 2014 Copa Libertadores as the 2013 Copa Libertadores champion.2 Flamengo is qualified for the second stage of the 2014 Copa Libertadores as the 2013 Copa do Brasil champion.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.3 Flamengo and Portuguesa were punished for selecting suspended players in Round 38. Each club lost 4 points.
Updated to games played on 24 November 2013.
Source: CBF
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
Source: Globo Esporte
