The 2014 Sony Open Tennis (also known as 2014 Miami Masters) was a professional men and women's tennis tournament played on outdoor hard courts. It was the 30th edition of the Miami Masters, and was part of the Masters 1000 category on the 2014 ATP World Tour, and of the Premier Mandatory category on the 2014 WTA Tour. All men and women's events took place at the Tennis Center at Crandon Park in Key Biscayne, Florida, United States, from March 17 through March 30, 2014.
Players with byes receive first round points.
The total commitment prize money for this year's event was $5,649,405 for men and $5,427,105 for women (WTA Tour and ATP World Tour).
The following are the seeded players. Rankings and seedings are according to ATP rankings on March 17, 2014.
The following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:
 Marcos Baghdatis
 Kyle Edmund
 Ryan Harrison
 Karen Khachanov
 Guido Pella
The following players received entry from the qualifying draw:
 Aljaž Bedene
 Alex Bogomolov, Jr.
 Thiemo de Bakker
 David Goffin
 Andrey Golubev
 Malek Jaziri
 Steve Johnson
 Lukáš Lacko
 Paul-Henri Mathieu
 Jack Sock
 Dominic Thiem
 Jimmy Wang
The following players received entry as lucky losers:
 Benjamin Becker
 Dušan Lajović
Before the tournament
 Pablo Andújar
 Juan Martín del Potro (wrist injury)
 Tommy Haas (shoulder injury)
 Jürgen Melzer (shoulder injury)
 Benoît Paire (knee injury)
 Dudi Sela
 Janko Tipsarević (foot injury)
 Mikhail Youzhny (back injury)
During the tournament
 Tomáš Berdych (gastroenteritis)
 Florian Mayer
 Kei Nishikori (groin injury)
 Mikhail Kukushkin
1 Rankings as of March 17, 2014.
The following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:
 Deiton Baughman /  Martin Redlicki
 Ryan Harrison /  Jack Sock
The following are the seeded players. Rankings and seedings are according to WTA rankings on March 3, 2014. Points before is as of March 17, 2014.
The following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:
 Casey Dellacqua
 Indy de Vroome
 Victoria Duval
 Anett Kontaveit
 Rebecca Peterson
 Nadia Petrova
 Heather Watson
 Aleksandra Wozniak
The following players received entry from the qualifying draw:
 Kiki Bertens
 Estrella Cabeza Candela
 Kimiko Date-Krumm
 Zarina Diyas
 Olga Govortsova
 Nadiya Kichenok
 Patricia Mayr-Achleitner
 Shahar Pe'er
 Katarzyna Piter
 Virginie Razzano
 Coco Vandeweghe
 Donna Vekić
The following player received entry as a lucky loser:
 Jana Čepelová
Before the tournament
 Victoria Azarenka (foot injury) --> replaced in the draw by Chanelle Scheepers
 Simona Halep (toe injury) --> replaced in the draw by Jana Čepelová
 Polona Hercog --> replaced in the draw by Caroline Garcia
 Ayumi Morita --> replaced in the draw by Silvia Soler Espinosa
 Laura Robson (wrist injury) --> replaced in the draw by Yaroslava Shvedova
During the tournament
 Alisa Kleybanova (illness)
 Sabine Lisicki (flu)
 Mona Barthel (gastrointestinal illness)
1 Rankings as of March 3, 2014.
The following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:
 Sorana Cîrstea /  Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova
 Kirsten Flipkens /  Ana Ivanovic
 Martina Hingis /  Sabine Lisicki
 Garbiñe Muguruza /  Carla Suárez Navarro
The following pair received entry as alternates:
 Sharon Fichman /  Megan Moulton-Levy
Before the tournament
 Bethanie Mattek-Sands (left hip injury)
During the tournament
 Alisa Kleybanova (illness)
 Novak Djokovic def.  Rafael Nadal, 6–3, 6–3
 Serena Williams def.  Li Na, 7–5, 6–1
 Bob Bryan /  Mike Bryan def.  Juan Sebastián Cabal /  Robert Farah, 7–6(10–8), 6–4
 Martina Hingis /  Sabine Lisicki def.  Ekaterina Makarova /  Elena Vesnina, 4–6, 6–4, [10–5]
