The Estadio Malvinas Argentinas is the largest stadium in Mendoza, fourth largest census metropolitan area in Argentina. It is owned and administrated by the Provincial Government, and has a seating capacity of over 40,000 spectators.
Argentina was chosen as the host 1978 World Cup of the nation by FIFA in London, England on 6 July 1966, and Mendoza, as one of the largest cities in the countries, was selected as a venue. The organizing committee, under supervision of the military dictatorship that ruled Argentina since 1976, proposed a new stadium to be built by the Cerro de la Gloria, in General San Martín Park and taking advantage of the topography of a natural depression located on the slopes of the hill. Beside the stadium itself, the project included new access roads, parking lots, a training auxiliar field and other complementary works.
The construction began in 1976 and the Estadio Ciudad de Mendoza ("City of Mendoza Stadium") was opened on May 14th, 1978 with a friendly match between a team formed by players from Mendoza and another one with players from San Rafael. During June 1978, Mendoza hosted six Fifa World Cup matches, three first round matches and three second round matches. That same year Gimnasia y Esgrima de Mendoza became the first team from Mendoza to play a first division match at the stadium. Other teams from Mendoza that have reached first division and used the Malvinas Argentinas as home stadium since are Independiente Rivadavia, Club Atletico Huracan Las Heras, San Martín de Mendoza and Godoy Cruz.
After the 1982 Falklands War, the stadium was renamed "Estadio Malvinas Argentinas". The new name reflects Argentina's claims of sovereignty over the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas in Spanish).
During the 1993/1994 season Argentinos Juniors, original from Buenos Aires, played home matches in this stadium. In 1994, Mendoza started hosting the annual Football Summer Tournaments, that has taken place in the Malvinas Argentinas stadium since. In 2011, Godoy Cruz qualified for the Copa Libertadores and the stadium hosted for the first time an international club competition. The Mendocenean club qualified to the most important continental tournament once again in 2012 and took part of the 2011 and 2014 Copa Sudamericana; Godoy Cruz has played all of its home matches for international competitions at the Malvinas Argentinas stadium.
The stadium was renovated for the 2011 Copa America, held in Argentina. Among other works during the renovation all the seats were replaced, the bathrooms were reconstructed, the roof of the stadium was repaired and a new 128 m2 LED screen was installed, being during that time the largest of its kind in South America.
The stadium was built for the 1978 FIFA World Cup and during June 1978 Mendoza it hosted six matches, three group 4 matches and three second round matches.
Beside the 1978 FIFA World Cup, Malvinas Argentinas stadium has been one of the venues for the 2001 FIFA World Youth Championship, the 2011 Copa America and the 2013 South American Youth Football Championship.
Argentina national football team has played several friendly matches in Mendoza but only one official match: it was on 2012 against Uruguay for the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification.
Los Pumas has played several test matches here and four The Rugby Championship matches: two against South Africa, in 2012 and 2013, and two against Australia, in 2014 and 2015.
The final and 3rd place match of the 2005 Under 21 Rugby World Championship were played at this stadium, while the rest of the tournament was held in smaller different stadiums of Mendoza province.
The stadium played host to Amnesty International's Human Rights Now! Benefit Concert on October 14, 1988. The show was headlined by Sting and Peter Gabriel and also featured Bruce Springsteen & The E Street Band, Tracy Chapman and Youssou N'Dour.
Other artists that have played at the Malvinas Argentinas are Maná, Ricardo Arjona, Joaquín Sabina, Joan Manuel Serrat, Chayanne, Soda Stereo, Charly Garcia and Ricky Martin.
The main event of the 2002 Fiesta Nacional de la Vendimia was held at this stadium.
List of association football stadiums by capacity
