Leonardo Martin Mayer (born May 15, 1987) is an Argentine professional tennis player.
Mayer achieved a career-high singles ranking of world No. 21 in June 2015 and world No. 58 in doubles in September 2015. He is coached by Francisco Yunis. He was born in Corrientes and resides in Buenos Aires.
He started playing tennis at age nine.
As a junior, he won the 2005 French Open Boys' Doubles and the Orange Bowl with Emiliano Massa, reaching as high as No. 2 in the combined world rankings in June 2005.
Junior Grand Slam Results:
Singles
French Open: 1R (2005)
Wimbledon: 3R (2005)
US Open: QF (2005)
Doubles
French Open: W (2005)
Wimbledon: 1R (2005)
US Open: 2R (2005)
He won one Challenger singles title in 2008, against Sergio Roitman, and lost in three other finals.
He qualified for his first Grand Slam at the 2009 French Open, and beat 15th seed James Blake in straight sets in the first round. He lost to Tommy Haas in five sets in the second round. At Wimbledon, he beat Óscar Hernández in straight sets in the first round. He lost to Fernando González in four sets in the second round.
Mayer had a successful American summer, reaching the semifinals of the LA Tennis Open (lost to Carsten Ball) and the quarterfinals of the Pilot Pen Tennis tournament in New Haven (lost to Igor Andreev). At the 2009 US Open, Mayer reached the second round, losing to Radek Štěpánek in straight sets.
In 2011, Mayer qualified for the Brasil Open and defeated world no. 73, Russian Igor Andreev in the first round of the main draw. In the second round, he played seventh seed, Italian Potito Starace and lost.
Leonardo reached the third round of the French Open for the third time and the US Open in 2012, losing to Nicolás Almagro in straight sets at Roland Garros and Juan Martín del Potro in New York.
In February 2014, he reached his first career ATP final at Viña del Mar, defeating second seed Tommy Robredo en route. Mayer lost to top seed Fabio Fognini in straight sets.
In Oeiras and Niza, he reached the quarterfinals as a qualifier in both. He was defeated in the third round of the French Open again, this time by Rafael Nadal.
In Wimbledon, he reached the fourth round of a grand slam for the first time. He defeated No. 25 seed Andreas Seppi, former Wimbledon semifinalist and Australian Open runner-up Marcos Baghdatis, and former junior champion Andrey Kuznetsov before being defeated by Grigor Dimitrov in straight sets. With this run, Mayer was ranked in the top 50 for the first time in his career.
Next, Mayer played in the 2014 MercedesCup, where he lost in the second round to Mikhail Youzhny. Then he played at the 2014 International German Open, where he beat Guillermo García-López and Philipp Kohlschreiber, reaching the final without dropping a set. In the final, he defeated top seed David Ferrer in three sets, winning his maiden ATP title.
After an one-month break, Mayer participated at the 2014 Winston-Salem Open as the fourth seed. He lost in his opening match against qualifier David Goffin in straight sets.
Seeded 23rd at the 2014 US Open, Mayer reached the third round, being defeated by Kei Nishikori. In the doubles tournament, he partnered with compatriot Carlos Berlocq and made it to the quarterfinals, beating the reigning Wimbledon champions, Jack Sock and Vasek Pospisil en route.
Mayer won his two singles rubbers against Israel in the Davis Cup Play-offs, helping Argentina to secure a place in the 2015 World Group.
He lost in the second round at the Malaysian Open to Jarkko Nieminen, an in the first round of the China Open to Martin Klizan. He lost in the second round of the Shanghai Masters to Roger Federer, who saved five match points against Mayer.
Mayer started the year at Doha, where he lost in the first round in a tight three-setter match against Andreas Seppi. Then he competed in the Apia International Sydney, where he reached the semifinals, being defeated by Mikhail Kukushkin.
In the Australian Open, he was defeated by Viktor Troicki in four sets. Next, he reached the quarterfinals at the Brasil Open, being defeated by local favourite João Souza in a controversial match.
On March 8, 2015, he played in the longest singles match in Davis Cup history, beating João Souza in 6 hours and 42 minutes, 7–6(7–4), 7–6(7–5), 5–7, 5–7, 15–13.
Mayer did not compete at Indian Wells, and was defeated in the third round of the Miami Masters by Kevin Anderson.
The Argentine started the European clay-court swing with a first round loss in Barcelona.Then, he reached the third round at Madrid, and the second round in the Rome Masters.
In the Open de Nice Côte d'Azur, he reached the third ATP final of his career, losing to Dominic Thiem in a contested match.
Leonardo reached the third round of the French Open for the fifth time, being defeated by Marin Cilic in straight sets.
In the grass court season, Mayer reached the quarterfinals at Nottingham (lost to Denis Istomin) and the third round of Wimbledon (lost to Kevin Anderson).
Current through the 2016 French Open.
