David William Heath (born February 16, 1969) is an American professional wrestler. He is best known for his appearances in the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) from 1998 to 2001 and intermittently throughout the mid-2000s under the ring name Gangrel.
Heath was trained by Boris Malenko in Florida. When his training was complete, he began performing in various independent promotions in the Florida area. In the Independent Professional Wrestling (IPW) promotion he won the IPW Tag Team Championship, before moving to Stampede Wrestling, where he formed a tag team with Tom Nash known as "The Blackhearts", with Heath and Nash competing under masks as "Destruction" and "Apocalypse" respectively. They won the Stampede International Tag Team Championship as a team.
In the early nineties, the Blackhearts were paired with Nash's wife Luna, wrestling in Joel Goodhart's Tri-State Wrestling, in Herb Abrams' Universal Wrestling Federation, and finally Giant Baba's All-Japan, where the team split up. During that time, the marriage between Nash and Luna broke up and Heath and Luna became romantically involved. They eventually married on Halloween 1994. The World Wrestling Federation (WWF), where Luna worked at the time, even broadcast a segment of Luna's "Wedding to a Vampire".
After the demise of the Blackhearts, Heath and Luna developed the Vampire Warrior gimmick, inspired by the movie The Lost Boys, under which, he wrestled in various promotions, including the Memphis-based United States Wrestling Association. Under this moniker, he won the USWA Southern Championship and the Pro Wrestling Illustrated Rookie of the Year award in 1993.
In 1994-1995, Heath portrayed a masked heel as "The Black Phantom" in the WWF, working as an enhancement talent against numerous stars, including Earthquake, Razor Ramon, The 1-2-3 Kid, Lex Luger, Bob Holly, Tatanka, Davey Boy Smith, Typhoon and others.
In 1995, Heath appeared in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) for a short period, feuding with Tommy Dreamer over Dreamer's affiliation with Heath's real-life wife Luna.
In early 1998, Heath appeared with World Championship Wrestling on WCW Worldwide, teaming with Michael Nova in a losing effort against the Faces of Fear.
In 1998, Heath was hired by the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) due to the support of then writers Bruce Prichard and Vince Russo, who believed in the merit of a vampire gimmick. Heath was given the name Gangrel, which was derived from a vampire clan from the role-playing game Vampire: The Masquerade. The gimmick involved an entrance which saw him rising from a ring of fire on stage, followed by a slow walk to the ring set to a sinister instrumental music theme. He also carried a goblet of "blood" with him and, during his entrance, would stop on the ring steps, take a drink, and spit it into the air. This was supposed to imply him drinking the blood of his many former victims as a practicing vampire.
Gangrel made his TV debut on the August 16, 1998 episode of Sunday Night Heat, and was victorious in his in-ring debut against Scott Taylor. He would go on to be undefeated for several months into his WWF career.
He then formed a gothic faction, called The Brood, with Edge and Christian. The Brood became known for their "blood baths", which involved the lights going out for a moment, and when they came back on, the targeted wrestler being covered in blood. The three temporarily joined up with The Undertaker and his Ministry of Darkness faction.
Gangrel got one of his first title shots at the 1999 Royal Rumble. He challenged D-Generation X member X-Pac for his WWF European Championship in a losing effort. He competed in the Royal Rumble match later that night and again the following year.
After splitting from the Ministry, The Brood began a feud with the Hardy Boyz and their manager Michael Hayes. During the feud, Gangrel suddenly turned on Edge and Christian and aligned himself with Matt and Jeff Hardy. He called the group The New Brood. Terri Runnels also began to show interest in the Hardy Boyz, however, and they eventually would win Terri's services as a manager, thus dumping Gangrel as a manager. Gangrel became a singles wrestler following the breakup of The New Brood; he was mainly used as a mid carder. In 2000, he brought in his real-life wife Luna Vachon as his manager until she was fired. Gangrel continued working for the WWF until he was released in 2001, reportedly for weight problems.
Heath wrestled for an independent promotion based out of Cleveland, Ohio called New Era Pro Wrestling in which he fought in a casket match against NEPW regular Gutter. Heath went on to defeat Gutter.
Heath and Luna wrestled many tours all over the world. The pair did a lot of wrestling (as Heath continnues to do as Gangrel) with the United Kingdom-based All Star Wrestling.
Living on the California coast, Heath (as Vampire Warrior) wrestled for North American Wrestling (NAW).
As Vampire Warrior, he wrestled in the main event of the ICWA's Show Revolution 5, losing to Joe Legend in a Casket match for the NWA: ICWA France Heavyweight Championship.
In 2009, he was involved with the Hulkamania Australian Tour event in Melbourne, Australia. Teaming up with Black Pearl, he lost to The Nasty Boys in an Australian Street Fight.
Gangrel is currently wrestling for independent promotions Wrestling Fan Xperience (WFX) and Vendetta Pro Wrestling.
Gangrel is also a part of the Territory League promotion, where he is a member of the Los Angeles Templars.
On January 23, 2010 Gangrel was inducted into the Legends Pro Wrestling "Hall of Fame" by Jack Blaze in Wheeling, WV at their annual "LPW Over The Edge" event.
Gangrel is the current All Star Wrestling Heavyweight Champion in British Columbia, Canada.
He is currently wrestling in Territory League with several former WWE Stars, like Solofa Fatu.
It was announced on October 27, 2012 that Gangrel would be appearing for Niagara Falls, Ontario based promotion Busted Knuckle Pro Wrestling on December 8 for their Holiday Havoc event. He is scheduled to wrestle local star "EZE" Eric Cairnie at the event.
On May 11 & 12, 2013 Gangrel participated in California based Alpha Omega Wrestling's two-day "Pride of the Ring II" supercard in Indio California. He was defeated in a 4-man elimination match the first day and lost an AOW Heavyweight Championship match to Eric Watts of "Tough Enough" fame on the second.
On May 18, Gangrel made his debut for Chikara, managing The Day Walkers (Alexandre Barnabus Castle and Mathias Cage) to the second round of the 2013 Tag World Grand Prix.
In August 2013, Gangrel toured Saskatchewan, Canada with High Impact Wrestling Canada as part of the "Blood Wars" Tour, making stops in La Loche, Ile a la Crosse, Moose Jaw, and Regina.
On June 6, 2014 at House of Hardcore 4 Gangrel teamed with Joe Caldo and Hurricane Helms to defeat Vik Dalishus, Bill Carr, and Cerebus in a Six-man tag team match.
On June 7, 2014 at House of Hardcore 5 Gangrel teamed with Cerebus and Fungus to defeat Vik Dalishus, Dan Barry and Bill Carr in a Six-man tag team match.
On June 14, 2014 at House of Hardcore 6 Gangrel teamed with Matt Striker to face Rikishi & X-Pac in a losing effort.
In 2013 and 2014 Gangrel has appeared on a regular basis for the West Coast Wrestling Connection based in Portland and Salem, Oregon.
In 2015, Gangrel has appeared for Big Time Wrestling events in Vermont, Maine, and Virginia. He also is a featured competitor for the Las Vegas-based Paragon Pro Wrestling which airs on Pop (formerly TV Guide channel).
On July 18, 2015, in Kitchener, Ontario, Gangrel won the Pure Wrestling Association Ontario championship, defeating EZE Eric Cairnie. He lost the championship the next day to "Reckless" Ryan Swift.
On February 14, 2016 Gangrel appeared for Professional Wrestling Live in Solihull, West Midlands, UK at Kingshurst Labour Club and became the first ever foreign PWL Heavyweight Champion.
Gangrel successfully defended this title on 2 separate occasions, but was defeated by local wrestler Johnny Thunder on 25 February 2016 at Gilbert's Willenhall, UK.
Gangrel had already beaten Thunder in the main event of the night with his signature 'Impaler' DDT move in a steel cage match, but Johnny Thunder's stable 'Power and Perfection' came to his aid and immobilised Gangrel long enough for Thunder to take the title by way of an unscheduled 'Money in the Bank' briefcase cash-in match on the title holder.
Heath reunited with former Ministry of Darkness member Viscera in 2004, returning as a hired goon of John "Bradshaw" Layfield during a feud with The Undertaker. They were defeated by The Undertaker on the September 23 episode of SmackDown.
In 2005, Heath was given another WWE contract and appeared in Ohio Valley Wrestling, the primary developmental territory of WWE. He was again released, however, before anything came of it.
In 2006, Heath was re-signed as a potential for WWE's newest brand, ECW, to appear in a vampire stable with Kevin Thorn and Ariel. WWE held off from reintroducing him to the main roster due to his ongoing weight problems.
At the September 21 Deep South Wrestling (DSW) event, he wrestled Tommy Suede. He continued to wrestle in DSW while he waited to be called up to one of the main rosters. On January 18, 2007, Gangrel was released from WWE.
On the 15th Anniversary WWE Raw special on December 10, 2007, Gangrel participated in a 15-man battle royal, but was eliminated by Al Snow following a rear naked choke.
On March 28, 2015, Gangrel appeared at the WWE Hall of Fame induction ceremony in support for Rikishi.
Heath appeared on the 10th episode of the WWE Network series: The Edge & Christian Show, released on May 2, 2016.
In 2007, Heath signed a deal to direct 12 films for "New Porn Order" under his Vampire Warrior ring name. His debut film is tentatively titled Miami Rump Shakerz 2.
Heath has two children, David Jr and Donovan, and has been married twice, first to fellow wrestler Luna Vachon, (during which he was stepfather to Luna's sons, Joshua and Van from her previous marriage to Tom Nash), and then to Kiara Dillon on June 13, 2008. According to social media accounts held by Heath the couple are now Divorced, sometime in late 2013, Dillon is now in another relationship
Finishing moves
Impaler DDT (Implant DDT)
Signature moves
Blood spit
Running twisting elbow drop
Trapping suplex
Managers
Kiara Dillon
Luna Vachon
Wrestlers managed
Edge and Christian
The Hardy Boyz
Wrestlers trained
Alexander Rusev
Steve Pain
Troy McClain
Entrance themes
"Blood" by Jim Johnston (WWF/E; used while a part of The Brood and in singles competition)
"Fangin' and Bangin'" by Dan-e-o (Independent circuit)
All Pro Wrestling
APW Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Billy Blade
Americas Wrestling Federation (Puerto Rico)
AWF World Junior Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
All Star Wrestling
ASW Trans-Canada Heavyweight Championship (3 times, current)
Atlantic Wrestling Council
AWC Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
European Wrestling Promotion
EWP World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
EWP Ironman Title Hardcore Knockout Tournament (2003)
Hoodslam
Hoodslam Golden Gin Championship (1 time)
International Pro Wrestling Association
IPWA Tag Team Championship (2 times) - with Rusty Brooks
Legends Pro Wrestling
LPW Hall of Fame (Class of 2010)
Maximum Pro Wrestling
MXPW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
NWA Florida
NWA Florida Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Tom Nash
National Wrestling League
NWL Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Paragon Pro Wrestling
PPW American Championship (1 time)
Pro Wrestling Illustrated
PWI Rookie of the Year (1993)
Ranked #102 of the top 500 wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1999
Pro Wrestling live
PWL Heavyweight championship (1 time)
Pro Wrestling Revolution
PWR Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Pure Wrestling Association
PWA Ontario Championship (1 time)
Stampede Wrestling
Stampede International Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Tom Nash
Tri-State Wrestling Alliance
TWA Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Blackheart Destruction
United States Wrestling Association
USWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
West Coast Wrestling Connection
WCWC Pacific Northwest Championship (2 times)
WCWC Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Mikey O'Shea
WCWC Legacy Championship (1 time)
