Chinese Taipei Football Association (CTFA; Chinese: 中華民國足球協會; pinyin: Zhōnghuá Mínguó Zúqiú Xiéhuì) is the governing body for football in Taiwan. Its official name in Chinese is the Football Association of the Republic of China, but it is billed as the Chinese Taipei Football Association abroad and uses the English initials on its badge (see Chinese Taipei for details of the issues related to the use of sporting names in the Republic of China).
1924: Established.
1954: Admitted to FIFA as the China National Football Association (Chinese: 中國足球協會).
1954: Formed and entered the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) as a founding member with various other Asian countries. At that time, the name of the governing body was Republic of China Football Council (Chinese: 中華民國足球委員會).
1973: Changed the name of the governing body to the Republic of China Football Association (Chinese: 中華民國足球協會).
1974: Exited the AFC.
1975: Admitted to the Oceania Football Confederation (OFC) as a provisional member.
1976: Member of the OFC.
1978: Suspended from the OFC due to naming problems.
1981: With the agreement of FIFA, changed its name to the Chinese Taipei Football Association.
1982: Re-admitted to the OFC.
1989: Re-admitted to the AFC.
Intercity Football League, men's top league since 2009
Chinese Taipei National Football League, top league until 2009
Chinese Taipei women's football championship, women's top league
Highschool Football League
Chinese Taipei National Youth Cup
Taipei Football Association (Taipei City)
Taoyuan Football Association (Taoyuan City)
Taoyuan Football Association was founded on October 27, 2002, and is dedicated to promoting children's football in Taoyuan City.
Taichung Football Association (Taichung City)
Hualien Football Association (Hualien County)
Hualien Football Association was founded on December 30, 2007.
Football in Taiwan
Chinese Taipei national football team
Chinese Taipei women's national football team
Asian Football Confederation
East Asian Football Federation
Judan Ali
