The 1992–93 Bundesliga was the 30th season of the Bundesliga, Germany's premier football league. It began on 14 August 1992 and ended on 5 June 1993. VfB Stuttgart were the defending champions.
Every team played two games against each other team, one at home and one away. Teams received two points for a win and one point for a draw. If two or more teams were tied on points, places were determined by goal difference and, if still tied, by goals scored. The team with the most points were crowned champions while the three teams with the least points were relegated to 2. Bundesliga.
Stuttgarter Kickers, Hansa Rostock, MSV Duisburg and Fortuna Düsseldorf were relegated to the 2. Bundesliga after finishing in the last four places. Due to a size reduction back to 18 teams, only two teams were promoted. These were Bayer 05 Uerdingen, winners of the 2. Bundesliga Northern Division and 1. FC Saarbrücken, champions of the Southern Division.
Source: www.dfb.de
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1As Bayer Leverkusen qualified for the Cup Winners' Cup, their UEFA Cup place was transferred to Karlsruhe.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Source: www.dfb.de
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.2The result of the match between Uerdingen and Frankfurt was originally 2–5. Due to a substitution error (Frankfurt had more than the three allowed foreign players on the pitch), the DFB awarded the game to Uerdingen with a 2–0 score.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
20 goals
 Ulf Kirsten (Bayer 04 Leverkusen)
 Anthony Yeboah (Eintracht Frankfurt)
17 goals
 Wynton Rufer (SV Werder Bremen)
15 goals
 Stéphane Chapuisat (Borussia Dortmund)
13 goals
 Andreas Thom (Bayer 04 Leverkusen)
 Fritz Walter (VfB Stuttgart)
 Uwe Wegmann (VfL Bochum)
11 goals
 Sergei Kiriakov (Karlsruher SC)
 Bruno Labbadia (FC Bayern Munich)
1992–93 2. Bundesliga
1992–93 DFB-Pokal
