The Double, in association football, is the achievement of winning a country's top tier division and its primary cup competition in the same season. The lists in this article examine this definition of a double, while derivative sections examine much less frequent, continental instances. The Double can also mean beating a team both home and away in the same league season, a feat often noted as doing the double over a particular opponent.
The first club to achieve a double was Preston North End in 1889, winning the FA Cup and The Football League in the inaugural season of the league.
The team who holds the record for the most doubles is Linfield of Northern Ireland, with a total of 23.
In Afghanistan, there are no national cups. The Afghan Premier League is the only national football competition in the country since 2012.
From 1977 to 1997, the double could be achieved in Australia by winning the National Soccer League and the NSL Cup.
Between 1997 and 2014, Australia had no national cup competition so the traditional league and cup double could not be achieved. Since the formation of the A-League in 2004, a double could be accomplished by winning the Premiership in the regular league season and the Championship in the finals series. The feat of winning the minor premiership and the finals during the NSL era was not officially recognised as a 'double'.
From 2014–15, the FFA Cup will take place on an annual basis.
In Bahrain three teams have won the Double of the Bahraini Premier League and the Bahraini King's Cup.
In Bangladesh four teams have won the Double of the National Football Championship / Bangladesh Premier League and the Federation Cup.
Bhutan has no national cup, the A-Division is the only national football competition in the country.
In Brunei, two teams have won the Double of the Brunei Premier League / Brunei Super League and the Brunei FA Cup.
In Cambodia only one team has won the Double of the Cambodian League and the Hun Sen Cup.
In China, three teams have won the Double of the Chinese Jia-A League / Chinese Super League and the Chinese FA Cup.
In Chinese Taipei, two teams have won the Double of the Enterprise Football League / Intercity Football League and the CTFA Cup.
Now in East Timor there is no national cup, the Super Liga Timorense is the only national football competition in the country.
In Guam two teams have won the Double of the Guam Men's Soccer League and the Guam FA Cup.
In Hong Kong, nine teams have won the Double of the Hong Kong First Division League and the Hong Kong Senior Challenge Shield.
In India, three teams have won the Double of the National Football League / I-League and the Durand Cup.
In Indonesia only one team has won the Double of the Indonesia Super League / Indonesian Premier League and the Piala Indonesia.
In Iran two teams have won the Double of the Azadegan League / Iran Pro League and the Hazfi Cup.
In Iraq, four teams have won the Double of the Iraqi Premier League and the Iraq FA Cup.
The Japanese Double is generally considered to be winning the league championship (the Japan Soccer League Division 1 until 1991–92 and the J. League Division 1 since then) and the Emperor's Cup. Winning the league and the Japan Soccer League Cup or its successor the J. League Cup is rare, and rarer still is winning the Emperor's Cup and the second division title.
First Division and Emperor's Cup
First Division and League Cup
(Note: Except for Verdy, every other club won the achievement as part of a treble. No First Division was held in 1992 and no League Cup was held in 1974, 1975 and 1995.)
Emperor's Cup and Second Division
In Jordan, three teams have won the Double of the Jordan Premier League and the Jordan FA Cup.
In North Korea two teams have won the Double of the DPR Korea League and the Republican Championship.
In South Korea two teams have won the Double of the First Division and the Korean National Football Championship in semi-professionla era. In professional era, one teams have won K League Classic and the KFA Cup and three teams have won the Double of the K League Classic Champions and the FA Cup.
First Division and National Football Championship (former FA Cup)
First Division and FA Cup
In Kyrgyzstan three teams have won the Double of the Kyrgyzstan League and the Kyrgyzstan Cup.
In Kuwait three teams have won the Double of the Kuwaiti Premier League and the Kuwait Emir Cup.
In Laos two teams have won the Double of the Lao Premier League and the Prime Minister's Cup.
In Lebanon six teams have won the Double of the Lebanese Premier League and the Lebanese FA Cup.
In Macau only one team has won the Double of the Campeonato da 1ª Divisão and the Taça de Macau.
In Malaysia seven teams have won the Double of the Malaysia League / Malaysia Semi-Pro League / Malaysia Premier League / Malaysia Super League and the Malaysia Cup.
In Maldives four teams have won the Double of the Maldives National Championship (1980–1999) / Dhivehi League (2000–present) and the Maldives FA Cup.
In Mongolia only one team has won the Double of the Niislel League and the Mongolia Cup.
In Myanmar only one team has won the Double of the Myanmar National League and the MFF Cup.
In the Northern Mariana Islands, only one team has won the double of the M*League Division 1 and the Northern Mariana Cup.
In Oman four teams have won the Double of the Omani League and the Sultan Qaboos Cup.
In Pakistan, three teams have won the Double of the Pakistan Premier League and the Pakistan National Football Challenge Cup.
Due to the sporadic nature of football competitions in the country, with a league not in place until the 21st century, and only the United Football League (UFL) to last more than a season, and a national cup competition not being consistently held annually, achieving a double has been mostly impossible until recently. The establishment of the UFL in 2009 led to annual league and cup tournaments. The institution of the PFF National Men's Club Championship (the national cup) in 2011 (next held in 2013) after years of dormancy meant that a domestic treble could now be contested. In 2013, a super cup is expected to be played, paving the way for a UFL treble.
Since the establishment of the UFL in 2009, a league double has been achieved twice. A domestic double (a title each from the UFL and the PFF) or a domestic treble (a UFL double and a PFF title) has yet to be won.
In Qatar three teams have won the Double of the Qatar Stars League and the Emir of Qatar Cup.
In Saudi Arabia five teams have won the Double of the Saudi Professional League and the King's Cup (1956–1990) (2008–present) / Crown Prince Cup (1990–2007).
In Singapore three teams have won the Double of the S.League and the Singapore Cup.
In Sri Lanka three teams have won the Double of the Sri Lanka Football Premier League and the Sri Lanka FA Cup.
In Syria six teams have won the Double of the Syrian Premier League and the Syrian Cup.
In Tajikistan six teams have won the Double of the Tajik League and the Tajik Cup.
In Thailand two teams have won the Double of the Kor Royal Cup (1916–1995) / Thai Premier League (1996–present) and the Thai FA Cup.
In Turkmenistan three teams have won the Double of the Ýokary Liga and the Turkmenistan Cup.
In the United Arab Emirates, five teams have won the Double of the UAE Arabian Gulf League and the UAE President's Cup.
In Uzbekistan four teams have won the Double of the Uzbek League and the Uzbekistan Cup.
In Vietnam three teams have won the Double of the V.League 1 and the Vietnamese National Cup.
In Yemen four teams have won the Double of the North Yemen Champions / Yemeni League and the Cup of the Republic / Yemeni President Cup.
In Algeria five teams have won the Double of the Algerian Ligue Professionnelle 1 and the Algerian Cup.
In Angola three teams have won the Double of the Girabola and the Taça de Angola.
In Benin two teams have won the Double of the Benin Premier League and the Benin Cup.
In Botswana seven teams have won the Double of the Botswana Premier League and the FA Challenge Cup.
In Burkina Faso two teams have won the Double of the Burkinabé Premier League and the Coupe du Faso.
In Burundi only one team has won the Double of the Burundi Premier League and the Burundian Cup.
In Cameroon five teams have won the Double of the Elite One and the Cameroonian Cup.
In Cape Verde only one team has won the Double of the Campeonato Nacional de Cabo Verde and the Taça Nacional de Cabo Verde.
In Central African Republic only one team has won the Double of the CAR League and the CAR Coupe Nationale.
In Chad no team has won the Double of the Chad Premier League and the Chad Cup.
In Comoros two teams have won the Double of the Comoros Premier League and the Comoros Cup.
In DR Congo six teams have won the Double of the Linafoot and the Coupe du Congo.
In Republic of the Congo three teams have won the Double of the Congo Premier League and the Coupe du Congo.
In Djibouti three teams have won the Double of the Djibouti Premier League and the Djibouti Cup.
In Egypt two teams have won the Double of the Egyptian Premier League and the Egypt Cup.
In Equatorial Guinea no team has won the Double of the Equatoguinean Premier League and the Equatoguinean Cup.
In Eritrea no team has won the Double of the Eritrean Premier League and the Eritrean Cup.
In Ethiopia three teams have won the Double of the Ethiopian Premier League and the Ethiopian Cup.
In Gabon four teams have won the Double of the Gabon Championnat National D1 and the Coupe du Gabon Interclubs.
In The Gambia two teams have won the Double of the GFA League First Division and the Gambian Cup.
In Ghana three teams have won the Double of the Ghana Premier League and the Ghanaian FA Cup.
In Guinea two teams have won the Double of the Guinée Championnat National and the Guinée Coupe Nationale.
In Guinea-Bissau three teams have won the Double of the Campeonato Nacional da Guiné-Bissau and the Taça Nacional da Guiné Bissau.
In Ivory Coast two teams have won the Double of the Ligue 1 and the Coupe de Côte d'Ivoire.
In Kenya two teams have won the Double of the Kenyan Premier League and the President's Cup.
In Lesotho three teams have won the Double of the Lesotho Premier League and the Lesotho Independence Cup.
In Liberia seven teams have won the Double of the Liberian Premier League and the Liberian Cup.
In Libya two teams have won the Double of the Libyan Premier League and the Libyan Cup.
In Madagascar four teams have won the Double of the THB Champions League and the Coupe de Madagascar.
In Malawi only one team has won the Double of the Malawi Premier Division and the Malawi FAM Cup.
In Mali three teams have won the Double of the Malian Première Division and the Malian Cup.
In Mauritania two teams have won the Double of the Ligue 1 Mauritania and the Coupe du Président de la République.
In Mauritius six teams have won the Double of the Mauritian League and the Mauritian Cup.
In Morocco three teams have won the Double of the Botola and the Coupe du Trône.
In Mozambique five teams have won the Double of the Moçambola and the Taça de Moçambique.
In Namibia only one team has won the Double of the Namibia Premier League and the NFA Cup.
In Niger eight teams have won the Double of the Niger Premier League and the Niger Cup.
In Nigeria seven teams have won the Double of the Nigeria Premier League and the Nigerian FA Cup.
In Rwanda three teams have won the Double of the Primus National Football League and the Rwandan Cup.
In São Tomé and Príncipe six teams have won the Double of the São Tomé and Príncipe Championship and the Taça Nacional de São Tomé e Príncipe.
In Senegal three teams have won the Double of the Senegal Premier League and the Senegal FA Cup.
In Seychelles two teams have won the Double of the Seychelles First Division and the Seychelles FA Cup.
In Sierra Leone two teams have won the Double of the Sierra Leone National Premier League and the Sierra Leonean FA Cup.
In Somalia no team has won the Double of the Somalia League and the Somalia Cup.
In South Africa thirteen teams have won the Double of the NFL / SASL / FPL / NPSL / NSL / South African Premier Division and the NFL Cup / SASF Cup / Nedbank Cup.
In South Sudan no team has won the Double of the South Sudan Football Championship and the South Sudan National Cup.
In Sudan two teams have won the Double of the Sudan Premier League and the Sudan Cup.
In Swaziland two teams have won the Double of the Swazi Premier League and the Swazi Cup.
In Tanzania only one team has won the Double of the Tanzanian Premier League and the Nyerere Cup (defunct).
In Togo four teams have won the Double of the Togolese Championnat National and the Coupe du Togo (defunct).
In Tunisia ten teams have won the Double of the Tunisian Ligue Professionnelle 1 and the Tunisian Cup.
In Uganda two teams have won the Double of the Ugandan Super League and the Ugandan Cup.
In Zambia six teams have won the Double of the Zambian Premier League and the Zambian Cup (defunct).
In Zimbabwe six teams have won the Double of the Zimbabwe Premier Soccer League and the Cup of Zimbabwe.
In Anguilla there is no national cup, the Anguillan League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Antigua and Barbuda two teams have won the Double of the Premier Division and the FA Cup.
In Aruba two teams have won the Double of the Division di Honor and the Torneo Copa Betico Croes.
In Bahamas two teams have won the Double of the Senior League and the President's Cup.
In Barbados seven teams have won the Double of the Barbados Premier Division and the Barbados FA Cup.
In Belize there is no national cup, the Premier League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Bermuda seven teams have won the Double of the Bermudian Premier Division and the Bermuda FA Cup.
In Bonaire there is no national cup, the Bonaire League is the only national football competition in the country.
There is no national cup in the British Virgin Islands, the BVIFA National Football League is the only national football competition in the country.
Canada doesn't have its own football league and so shares its league system with the United States. The national cup, the Canadian Championship, is the country's premier football competition and is only contested between the Canadian teams of the MLS and NASL. As American teams can only qualify for the CONCACAF Champions League through the MLS (with the exception for the 2014 season), the Canadian Championship determines who takes the country's berth in the Champions League.
Five teams from the Cayman Islands have won the double of the Cayman Islands League and the Cayman Islands FA Cup.
In Costa Rica no team has won the double of the Costa Rican Primera División and the Costa Rican Cup.
In Cuba there is no national cup, the Campeonato Nacional is the only national football competition in the country.
In Curaçao there is no national cup, the Curaçao League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Dominica two teams have won the Double of the Dominica Premiere League and the Dominica Knock-Out Tournament (defunct).
In Dominican Republic, there is no national cup, the Primera División is the only national football competition in the country.
In El Salvador only one team has won the Double of the Salvadoran Primera División and the Copa Presidente (defunct).
In French Guiana four teams have won the Double of the French Guiana Championnat National and the Coupe de Guyane.
In Grenada is no national cup, the Grenada League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Guadeloupe six teams have won the Double of the Guadeloupe Division d'Honneur and the Coupe de Guadeloupe.
In Guatemala three teams have won the Double of the Liga Nacional de Fútbol de Guatemala and the Copa de Guatemala (defunct).
In Guyana only one team has won the Double of the National Super League and the Guyana Mayors Cup.
In Haiti four teams have won the Double of the Ligue Haïtienne and the Coupe d'Haïti.
Club Deportivo Olimpia are the only club to complete the double having won both the Liga Nacional de Fútbol Profesional and Honduran Cup in 2015.
In Jamaica three teams have won the Double of the National Premier League and the Champions Cup.
In Martinique three teams have won the Double of the Martinique Championnat National and the Coupe de la Martinique.
In Mexico eight teams have won the Double of the Primera Fuerza / Liga MX and the Copa MX.
In Montserrat no team has won the Double of the Montserrat Championship and the Montserrat Cup.
In Nicaragua two teams have won the Double of the Nicaraguan Primera División and the Copa de Nicaragua (defunct).
In Panama is no national cup, the Liga Panameña is the only national football competition in the country.
In Puerto Rico only one team has won the Double of the Liga Nacional and the Torneo de Copa (defunct).
In Saint Kitts and Nevis four teams have won the Double of the Saint Kitts Premier Division and the Saint Kitts and Nevis National Cup.
And no team has won the Double of the Nevis Premier Division and the Saint Kitts and Nevis National Cup.
In Saint Lucia two teams have won the Double of the Saint Lucia Gold Division and the Saint Lucia FA Cup.
In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is no national cup, the NLA Premier League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Sint Maarten is no national cup, the Sint Maarten League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Suriname two teams have won the Double of the Hoofdklasse and the Surinamese Cup.
In Trinidad and Tobago thirteen teams have won the Double of the Port of Spain Football League / National League / Semi-Professional League / TT Pro League and the Trinidad and Tobago Cup.
In Turks and Caicos Islands is no national cup, the Provo Premier League is the only national football competition in the country.
Currently in the United States, the Double may mean either the MLS Double, which is achieved by winning both the MLS Supporters Shield and the MLS Cup, or a league/cup Double of either the MLS Cup or Supporters Shield, in addition to the US Open Cup or Canadian Championship for United States and Canadian clubs, respectively. The Double may also be a combination of any of the domestic cups mentioned above and the CONCACAF Champions League. As of 2013, no team has achieved the Treble of both MLS honours and a domestic cup in the same season.
The following is a list of doubles in the United States in the MLS era:
In the United States Virgin Islands there is no national cup, the U.S. Virgin Islands Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
Boca Juniors are the only club to simultaneously win the Argentine Primera División and the Copa Argentina, doing so in 1969 and 2015.
Club Bolívar are the only club to complete the double having won both the Liga de Fútbol Profesional Boliviano and Copa Aerosur (defunct) in 2009.
Due to the large size of the country and the late development of the transportation and communication infrastructure needed to support it, the Copa do Brasil is even more recent, beginning in 1989. Since then, there has been only two domestic double at national level:
Palmeiras won the 2 national competitions contested in 1967: The Taça Brasil and the Torneio Roberto Gomes Pedrosa
Cruzeiro won the honours in 2003 (as part of The Treble), after also taking the title in their state league, the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A and the Brazilian Cup, the Copa do Brasil
Two teams have won the Chilean double of the Chilean Primera División and Copa Chile.
Millonarios is the first Colombian club to win the double, taking both the Categoría Primera A and Copa Colombia in 1953 and 1963. Nacional became the second club in Colombia winning the double, taking both the Categoría Primera A (Apertura and Clausura) and Copa Colombia in 2013.
In Ecuador is no national cup, the Ecuadorian Serie A is the only national football competition in the country.
In Paraguay is no national cup, the Paraguayan Primera División is the only national football competition in the country.
In Peru is no national cup, the Peruvian Primera División is the only national football competition in the country.
In Uruguay three teams have won the Double of the Uruguayan Primera División and the Copa de Competencia (defunct).
To complete the double, a club must win the Venezuelan Primera División and the Copa Venezuela.
In American Samoa two teams have won the Double of the FFAS Senior League and the FFAS President's Cup.
In Cook Islands five teams have won the Double of the Cook Islands Round Cup and the Cook Islands Cup.
In Fiji two teams have won the Double of the League Championship (for Districts) and the FFA Cup.
In New Caledonia five teams have won the Double of the New Caledonia Division Honneur and the New Caledonia Cup.
Between 1970 and 2003, five New Zealand teams have won the double of the national championship (New Zealand National Soccer League (1970–92 and 2000–04), Superclub competition (1993–95), National Summer Soccer League (1996–98) or the New Zealand island soccer leagues National Final (1999)) and the Chatham Cup. From 1993 to 2003, the league champions were determined by a knockout tournament between the top-finishing teams at the end of the season, the team that finished in first place during the league phase of the season were not officially awarded a title.
From 2003, the league system in the country was drastically structured and saw the National Soccer League disband, with its teams now competing on a regional basis. The New Zealand Football Championship was formed and became the country's national league, exclusively ran for franchised teams as opposed to the traditional clubs that competed in the National Soccer League.
As with most franchise leagues, the Football Championship is split into two phases; the Premiership during the regular season and the Championship during the finals phase, which is contested between the top four-placed teams of the Premiership phase. The franchises are ineligible to participate in the Chatham Cup so the teams in the Football Championship don't have a cup competition to compete in.
In Papua New Guinea is no national cup, the Papua New Guinea Overall Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
In Samoa two teams have won the Double of the Samoa National League and the Samoa Cup.
In Solomon Islands is no national cup, the Telekom S-League is the only national football competition in the country.
In Tahiti nine teams have won the Double of the Tahiti First Division and the Tahiti Cup.
In Tonga only one team has won the Double of the Tonga Major League and the Tonga Cup (defunct).
In Albania four teams have won the Double of the Albanian Superliga and the Albanian Cup.
In Andorra three teams have won the Double of the Primera Divisió and the Copa Constitució.
Prior to the breakup of the Soviet Union, Armenian clubs were part of Soviet competition. Ararat Yerevan was one of just two non-Russian clubs to win the Soviet double, in 1973, with Nikita Simonyan at the helm. They also won the post-independence Armenian Double in 1993.
In Armenia four teams have won the Double of the Soviet Top League / Armenian Premier League and the Soviet Cup / Armenian Independence Cup.
In Austria, nine teams have won the Double of the Austrian Football Bundesliga and the Austrian Cup.
In Azerbaijan four teams have won the Double of the Azerbaijan Premier League and the Azerbaijan Cup.
In Belarus four teams have won the Double of the Belarusian Premier League and the Belarusian Cup.
In Belgium, four teams have won the Double of the Belgian Pro League and the Belgian Cup.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina two teams have won the Double of the Premier League of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Bosnia and Herzegovina Football Cup.
In Bulgaria four teams have won the Double of the Bulgarian A Football Group and the Bulgarian Cup.
In Croatia two teams have won the Double of the Yugoslav First League / Croatian First League and the Yugoslav Cup / Croatian Football Cup.
In Cyprus five teams have won the Double of the Cypriot First Division and the Cypriot Cup.
Two teams won the Double of the Czechoslovak First League and Czechoslovak Cup. Since the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993, the Double has consisted of the Czech First League and Czech Cup, being won by only one team to date.
In Denmark, five teams have won the Double of the Danish Superliga and the Danish Cup.
In England, seven teams have won the double of the Football League First Division (1888–1992) / Premier League (1992–present) and FA Cup.
Preston North End in 1889 won the double without losing a game all season. Arsenal are the only club to win the double both before and subsequent to the start of the Premier League, and the only club to do so in more than one decade. Manchester United won the double three times in the 1990s, including as part of a continental treble in 1998–99.
Blackpool won a double during the Second World War, winning the Football League North and the Football League War Cup in the 1942–43 season, when the nationwide Football League First Division and FA Cup were suspended.
In Estonia two teams have won the Double of the Meistriliiga and the Estonian Cup.
In Faroe Islands six teams have won the Double of the Faroe Islands Premier League and the Faroe Islands Cup.
In Finland, three teams have won the Double of the Veikkausliiga and the Finnish Cup.
In France, eleven teams have won the Double of the Ligue 1 and the Coupe de France.
In Georgia two teams have won the Double of the Georgian Premier League and the Georgian Cup.
A national cup competition was introduced in Germany in 1935, and was known as the Tschammer-Pokal for the country's then minister of sport. Between 1935 and the suspension of cup play in 1944 because of World War II, the Double was won only once.
Schalke 04 1937
Play for what had become the DFB-Pokal was resumed following the war in 1953 and up until well after the formation of the Bundesliga in 1963, no club was able to complete the double. A new cup trophy was introduced as it was felt the previous one was associated with the Nazi period.
In the modern-day Bundesliga era, the double has been won by only four clubs. Bayern Munich holds the record, with 11.
Bayern Munich (11) 1969, 1986, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2013 (as part of treble), 2014, 2016
FC Köln 1978
Werder Bremen 2004
Borussia Dortmund 2012
Following World War II, a separate football competition emerged in the Russian-occupied eastern area of Germany. The first division DDR-Oberliga was active from 1947–48 to 1990–91 (not held 1960–61) and saw the introduction of the FDGB-Pokal in 1949. The cup competition was not staged in 1950–51, 1952–53 and 1960–61. Five doubles were won in East German competition:
Dynamo Dresden (3) 1971, 1977, 1990
Dynamo Berlin 1988
F.C. Hansa Rostock 1991
Since the reunification of Germany no former East German club has won either the Bundesliga title or the DFB Pokal, and as of 2014, none of these former double winners are competing in the top tier.
In Gibraltar seven teams have won the Double of the Gibraltar Premier Division and the Rock Cup.
In Greece, only the big three of Athens have managed to win the double of the Superleague Greece and the Greek Cup.
Note: Olympiacos' 1959 season included the double, as well as four other unofficial cups, for a total of six trophies.
In Hungary, five teams have won the Double of the Nemzeti Bajnokság I and the Magyar Kupa.
In Iceland four teams have won the Double of the Úrvalsdeild and the Icelandic Cup.
In Ireland, the double is achieved by winning the League of Ireland and FAI Cup. Bohemians managed a similar feat in 1928 season by winning the League, FAI Cup, the League of Ireland Shield, Leinster Senior Cup. Derry City FC completed 'The Treble' in 1988–89 by also winning the League of Ireland Cup.
In Israel the Double can be achieved by winning the Top division championship and the Israel State Cup. The team that has won the most doubles to date is Maccabi Tel Aviv, with seven wins, followed by their city rivals, Hapoel Tel Aviv with four wins. A total of 15 doubles has been won.
Five Italians club share nine doubles of the Serie A championship and the Coppa Italia.
Note: In 2006, Inter finished third in Serie A but were awarded the title as the highest placed club not to be involved in the 2006 Italian football scandal. The club's 2010 double was made the Treble with their UEFA Champions League victory.
In Kazakhstan four teams have won the Double of the Kazakhstan Premier League and the Kazakhstan Cup.
In Kosovo four teams have won the Double of the Superleague (1999–present) and the Kosovar Cup (1999–present).
In Latvia two teams have won the Double of the Latvian Higher League and the Latvian Football Cup.
There is no national league in Liechtenstein as its clubs partake in the neighbouring Swiss football league system, the Liechtenstein Football Cup is the only national football competition in the country.
In Lithuania five teams have won the Double of the A Lyga and the Lithuanian Football Cup.
In Luxembourgian football the Double is made up of the National Division title and the Luxembourg Cup. As there are no other senior football competitions in the country, and no club have never come close to winning any European tournament, the Double is the ultimate achievement for a Luxembourgian club in one season.
By far the most successful club has been Jeunesse Esch, who have completed eight Doubles.
In Republic of Macedonia four teams have won the Double of the First Macedonian Football League and the Macedonian Football Cup.
In Malta six teams have won the Double of the Maltese Premier League and the Maltese FA Trophy.
Sheriff Tiraspol were only founded in 1997, but have come to dominate the Moldovan game, winning every title from 2001 to 2010 inclusive. Six of these were double wins (Moldovan National Division and Moldovan Cup). However Sheriff have never won the Moldovan Super Cup in any of their Double-winning years, though one reason for this was the Super Cup was not played in 2009 and 2010. One other club has won the double, Zimbru Chişinău in 1998.
In Montenegro only one team has won the Double of the Montenegrin First League and the Montenegrin Cup.
In Netherlands, six teams have won the Double of the Eredivisie and the KNVB Cup.
In Northern Ireland seven teams have won the Double of the Irish League/Premier League/Premiership and the Irish Cup.
In Norway, seven teams have won the Double of the Tippeligaen and the Norwegian Football Cup.
In Poland, five teams have won the Double of the Ekstraklasa and the Polish Cup.
Till now, Legia Warsaw is the only team to achieve Domestic Treble by winning the two trophies and the Polish SuperCup title.
In Portugal, the Double is called "Dobradinha" and is achieved by winning the Primeira Liga and the Portuguese Cup. Only the "Big Three" have done it since the nationwide round-robin league competition was introduced in 1934.
Benfica holds the record of 10 Doubles. Sporting was the first side to achieve the Double, in 1941, and the most recent one was Benfica, in 2014.
In Romania, the Double is called the Event and can be achieved by winning the Liga I and the Cupa României. The team that has won the most doubles to date is Steaua București, with nine wins, followed by their city rivals, Dinamo București with six wins. In recent times, CFR Cluj has won the Double twice, being the fourth non-Bucharest team to do so, after Universitatea Craiova, UT Arad and, the now defunct team, Ripensia Timişoara.
Note: Steaua București initially won the double in 1987–88 but voluntarily gave up their Cupa României title.
Four Russian teams achieved the Double of the Soviet Top League and the USSR Cup in the former Soviet Union. The final Soviet championship was contested in 1991 and, following the break-up of the USSR, newly independent states organised their own national competitions, with UEFA regarding the Russian Premier League and the Russian Cup as the respective successors to the old Soviet league and USSR Cup.
In San Marino five teams have won the Double of the Campionato Sammarinese di Calcio and the Coppa Titano.
Three teams have accomplished the double of the Scottish league championship and the Scottish Cup. Only Aberdeen have managed to break the Old Firm trend, following their stint of success in the 1980s.
Two teams in the current Republic of Serbia have won the Double of the Yugoslav First League and Yugoslav Cup (1923–92), the First League of FR Yugoslavia/Serbia and Montenegro and FR Yugoslavia/Serbia and Montenegro Cup (1992–2006), and the Serbian SuperLiga and Serbian Cup (2006–present).
In Slovakia seven teams have won the Double of the Czechoslovak First League / Slovak Super Liga and the Czechoslovak Cup / Slovak Cup.
In Slovenia, two teams have won the Double of the Slovenian PrvaLiga and the Slovenian Football Cup.
In Spain four teams have won the Double (Doblete) of the La Liga and the Copa del Rey.
Note: Barcelona's 2009 and 2015 Doubles were part of the club's Treble which also included their UEFA Champions League victory.
In Sweden, six teams have won the Double of the Swedish championship and the Svenska Cupen.
It should however be noted that Svenska Cupen wasn't introduced until the 1941 season while Allsvenskan started for the 1923–24 season. Svenska Cupen was also not played between 1954 and 1966. It should also be considered that winning Allsvenskan did not grant the title of Swedish champions until 1931 and between 1982 and 1992 when the title was given to the winner of other cup tournaments that were organized at the end of the league season. The number of doubles for IFK Göteborg and Malmö FF are affected by this. IFK Göteborg won the Swedish Championship together with Svenska Cupen in one additional season to the table below, they won the two titles in 1983, a year when they did not win Allsvenskan. Additionally while Malmö won Allsvenskan in 1989, they were not Swedish Championships for that season as they did not win the play-off following the ordinary league play. All other teams in the table below won the Swedish Championship in their double-winning seasons. The latest club to win a double is AIK who completed the feat in 2009. In 1982, IFK Göteborg also managed to combine its double with winning the UEFA Cup.
In Switzerland, eight teams have won the Double of the Swiss Super League and the Swiss Cup.
In Turkey, four teams have won the Double of the Süper Lig and the Turkish Cup.
Note: Galatasaray's 2000 Double was part of the club's Treble which also included their UEFA Cup victory.
Prior to the breakup of the Soviet Union, Ukrainian clubs were part of Soviet competition. Since 1992, the country has had its own domestic competition. Dynamo Kyiv has 4 Soviet and 8 Ukrainian Doubles among its honours.
In Ukraine two teams have won the Double of the Soviet Top League / Ukrainian Premier League and the Soviet Cup / Ukrainian Cup.
In Wales seven teams have won the Double of the Division One (1904–92) / Welsh Premier League (1992–present) and the Welsh Cup.
Achieving this and also winning the Welsh League Cup would make a domestic Treble'. To date, two have achieved the Treble.
The Greenlandic Men's Football Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
In Kiribati there is no national cup, the Kiribati National Championship is the only national football competition in the country.
In Northern Cyprus five teams have won the Double of the Birinci Lig and the Kıbrıs Kupası / Federasyon Kupası.
In Réunion four teams have won the Double of the Réunion Premier League and the Coupe de la Réunion.
In Zanzibar only one team has won the Double of the Zanzibar Premier League and the Nyerere Cup (defunct).
A rarer, and less coveted, domestic double is that of winning the league championship and the League Cup. In many leagues this can not be done as there is no second domestic cup competition (as in Italy and the Netherlands) or it has been disbanded (such as in Spain and Denmark). The format of league cups and the number of participating teams can vary enormously from one country to another. In the case of Germany, it should be noted that the DFB-Ligapokal was played in the summer months prior to the Bundesliga and therefore was won in the preceding calendar year to the title win.
In many countries, knock-out competitions exclusive to clubs outside the top division(s) also exist. This gives lower ranked clubs a chance to win a double. Examples include:
 Cagliari Calcio won Serie C1 (third tier) and the Coppa Italia Serie C in 1988–89
 Spezia Calcio won Lega Pro Prima Divisione (third tier) and the Coppa Italia Lega Pro in 2011–12
 Birmingham City won Division Two (third tier) and Football League Trophy in 1994–95
 Wolverhampton Wanderers won Fourth Division (fourth tier) and Football League Trophy in 1987–88
 MK Dons won League Two (fourth tier) and Football League Trophy in 2007–08
 Wycombe Wanderers won Conference (fifth tier) and the FA Trophy in 1992–93
 Falkirk won Scottish First Division (second tier) and Scottish Challenge Cup in 1993–94 and 2004–05
 Inverness CT won Scottish First Division (second tier) and Scottish Challenge Cup in 2003–04
 St Mirren won Scottish First Division (second tier) and Scottish Challenge Cup in 2005–06
 Queen of the South won Scottish Second Division (third tier) and Scottish Challenge Cup in 2012–13
 Clyde won Scottish B Division (second tier) and Supplementary Cup (predecessor to the Scottish Challenge Cup) in 1951–52
A very rare event. A Trans-State double occurs when a club wins a league and a cup which technically belong to two different countries and different associations. This usually happens as a result of a change in the political situation in the club's home country, or if the club has expatriated and is eligible to participate in the competitions of its native country and its adopted one.
In the same spirit as the European Treble, the European Double consists of winning the top tier European tournament (currently the UEFA Champions League) and domestic league title in a single season or calendar year. This has been achieved on 23 occasions by 15 clubs from 56 European competitions. FC Barcelona has achieved this on the most number of occasions (5). AFC Ajax and Real Madrid are the only teams that have successfully defended a European Double. José Mourinho has the unique distinction of being the only manager to achieve this double with two different clubs, having done so with F.C. Porto (2004) and Internazionale (2010).
(*) as part of The Treble
In 1994–95, Louis van Gaal's Ajax with players such as Jari Litmanen, Patrick Kluivert, Marc Overmars, Finidi George, Nwankwo Kanu, Frank and Ronald de Boer, Edgar Davids, Clarence Seedorf, Winston Bogarde, Michael Reiziger, and Edwin van der Sar succeeded an unbeaten double, winning the Dutch Eredivisie with a 27–7–0 record, and the UEFA Champions League with a 7–4–0 record. Van Gaal's dream team was the only club to achieve a European Double with no defeat.
The UEFA Europa League (formerly the UEFA Cup), with a domestic league title win, offers the chance for a club to win a lesser European double; but arguably a more prestigious achievement than a domestic double. This has been completed on fourteen occasions.
g In 1987, Gothenburg finished third in the Allsvenskan. At this time, the title was decided by a play-off between the top four teams. They defeated first placed Malmö FF in the play-off final.
Similarly, there were six occasions of clubs winning their League and the now defunct UEFA Cup Winners' Cup (CWC). No club ever won the CWC as part of a recognised treble. In the case of FC Mageburg and Dynamo Kiev, it is also worth noting that the domestic Championships they won are also now disbanded, due to German reunification and the disintegration of the Soviet Union respectively.
Outside the UEFA confederation winning the Continental Double may be won in a calendar year, rather than a single season.
There are various possible combinations of winning two knock-out competitions.
A Domestic Cup Double consists of winning both domestic cup competitions in a single season or calendar year (for seasons when this double was won in conjunction with the league title see Domestic Treble). Examples include:
There have been several occasions when a club has won its association's cup or league cup and a UEFA trophy but not its League title. For European cup doubles won in conjunction with the League title, see The Treble.
L A unique Cup Treble.
A combination of domestic league or cup and a lesser domestic or continental trophy may be won in the same season. Examples include (this list does not include doubles achieved as part of a treble):
Barcelona's 1960 team won both La Liga and the Fairs Cup.
Real Zaragoza won a Fairs Cup and Copa del Rey double in the 1963–64 season.
Leeds United were the first English team to win a double involving European and domestic trophies. It was in 1968 when Leeds won the Football League Cup and Inter-Cities Fairs Cup.
Chicago Fire won the MLS Supporters' Shield and US Open Cup in 2003.
Dinamo Tbilisi won the Georgian Cup and CIS Cup in 2004
Espanyol won the Copa del Rey and Copa Catalunya in 2006. This would not normally be counted as a domestic cup double comparable to those mentioned above, as the latter competition is not nationwide or league-wide.
FC Copenhagen won the Danish Superliga and the pan-Scandinavian Royal League in 2006.
A national team cannot usually win a FIFA World Cup and their continental championship in the same year because they are usually not held in the same year (except for the Africa Cup of Nations until 2010), but one which wins both titles consecutively could be said to have "done the double".
 Uruguay won the gold medal at the 1924 Summer Olympics and the 1924 South American Championship. (Prior to the FIFA World Cup's foundation in 1930, the Olympic champions were considered to be the world champions.)
 West Germany won UEFA Euro 1972 and the 1974 FIFA World Cup
 France won the 1998 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2000
 Brazil won the 2002 FIFA World Cup and the 2004 Copa América
 Spain won UEFA Euro 2008, the 2010 FIFA World Cup and UEFA Euro 2012
 Italy won the 1933–35 Central European International Cup and the 1934 FIFA World Cup
 Brazil won the 1956 Panamerican Championship and the 1958 FIFA World Cup
 England won the 1965–66 British Home Championship and the 1966 FIFA World Cup
William Sudell, as manager of Preston North End won the inaugural First Division going unbeaten in the league (12 clubs:22 games) and won the eighteenth edition of the FA Cup without conceding a goal in that competition in 1888–89.
Jock Stein won the double on 9 occasions with Celtic between 1967 and 1977: 4 the doubles of the Scottish league championship and the Scottish Cup, 3 the doubles of the Scottish league championship and the Scottish League Cup and 2 the Treble.
Sir Alex Ferguson has won the double on four occasions; with Aberdeen in 1983–84, and with Manchester United in 1993–94, 1995–96 and 1998–99. This achievement makes him the only manager to win the double on both sides of the Anglo-Scottish border.
Sven-Göran Eriksson is the only manager to win a domestic double in three different countries, having done so in Sweden, Portugal and Italy with Göteborg (1981–82), Benfica (1982–83) and Lazio (1999–2000) respectively. Note that this included back-to-back double wins in separate countries.
Louis van Gaal won the double with Barcelona in 1997–98 and Bayern Munich in 2009–10; subsequent to his undefeated European Double with Ajax in 1994–95.
The Treble
The Quadruple
