Indonesia Super League (ISL) (Indonesian: Liga Super Indonesia) is the highest professional level competition for football clubs in Indonesia. This competition is managed by PT Liga Indonesia.
It was once replaced with the rival Indonesian Premier League as the top level competition from 2011 to 2013, after which the ISL would once again emerge as the top level competition following the disbandment of the IPL. It is currently sponsored by Qatar National Bank from 2015 until 2017, thus officially known as the QNB League.
Note:^1 Perseru Serui is using Mandala Stadium in Jayapura due to Marora Stadium being renovated to meet the stadium standards set by the league.^2 Persiram Raja Ampat is using Maguwoharjo Stadium in Sleman because their new stadium in Waisai is under construction and targeted to be completed in 2015.
Building and managing a complete U-21 team is one of the requirements for clubs participating in the ISL. U-21 teams compete in the Indonesia Super League U-21 which is held in parallel with the main competition.
Before 2008, the highest level of professional football competition in Indonesia was the Premier Division. It used the combination format of double round-robin first round and single eliminations second round. Indonesia Super League uses the double round-robin competition format.
Considering only these two ISL editions, Persipura Jayapura is considered as the best achieving clubs, since they could finish the first and second position consecutively. Considering the whole history of top level of professional football league in Indonesia, Persebaya Surabaya, Persik Kediri along with Persipura Jayapura are the best achievers, winning the competitions twice.
2008–2012: Djarum
2013–2023: BV Sport (Commercial Rights)
2015–2017: Qatar National Bank Group
2015: Bank Papua (Monthly Awards Sponsor)
2008–2013: VIVA Group
2014: VIVA Group & MNC Group
2015–: Net TV, Matrix Garuda, Big TV, Domikado & MNC Group
The first season of ISL used format for foreign players as the previous edition of top layer league in Indonesia, which allows club to have 4 foreign players from any countries without further restrictions. Only 3 of them are allowed to play together in a match.
Starting with the 2015 season, Indonesian FA has reduced the number of foreign players allowed to be used by clubs to only three players. Furthermore, those foreign players need to conform with the following condition:
Players from European or American countries should have played in the second division (third layer of their respective competition system).
Players from Asian countries whose club competed in the AFC Champions League and AFC Cup should have played in (at least) in the first division (second layer of their respective competition system).
Players from African countries and Asian countries (whose club did not compete in the AFC Champions League and AFC Cup) should have played (at least) in the premier/super league (highest layer of their respective competition system).
Players from Southeast Asian countries should be in their national team.
In 2010-2011 edition, Indonesian FA introduced a new restriction regarding registration of new foreign players from African countries. Players from African countries who have never played before in Indonesia Super League shall be an international player for his country. The respective players have to show formal evidences that they have played for their country in official FIFA matches. Players failed to show such evidences will not get permit to play in Indonesia Super League 2010-2011.
Indonesia Super League All-Star Game
List of Indonesia Super League hat-tricks
List of football clubs in Indonesia
List of top-division football clubs in AFC countries
