Brian Christopher Lawler (born January 10, 1972) is an American professional wrestler. He is the son of color commentator and professional wrestler Jerry "The King" Lawler and brother of wrestling referee Kevin Christian. He is known for his career in World Wrestling Entertainment, where he performed as Grand Master Sexay as one-half of the tag team Too Cool with Scotty 2 Hotty.
Lawler began his career as one half of the masked tag team "The Twilight Zone" with Tony Williams under the individual ring names of Nebula (Lawler) and Quasar (Williams). They both soon unmasked, Brian continued to wrestle in the United States Wrestling Association under the name "Too Sexy" Brian Christopher. He was used as a face and one of the promotion's heels. There, he feuded with wrestlers such as Jeff Jarrett, Bill Dundee, Tom Prichard, and The Moondogs, and even his father Jerry Lawler (though he was never revealed to be Lawler's son while in the USWA, in 1999, fellow Power Pro Wrestling wrestler Doug Gilbert broke kayfabe and admitted it during a shoot interview). Among his partners were Tony Williams (as the New Kids), Doug Gilbert, Scotty Flamingo, and "Hot Stuff" Eddie Gilbert.
Brian joined the World Wrestling Federation in 1997, still known as Brian Christopher, and began to compete in the fledgling light heavyweight division. Taka Michinoku defeated him in the finals of a tournament for the Light Heavyweight Championship. In mid-1998, he started teaming up with Scott "Too Hot" Taylor to form the tag team of Too Much. For a while, he and Scott Taylor played up a quasi-homosexual angle that involved them speeding around on scooters/mopeds and culminated with Too Much riding off on the back of the Disciples of Apocalypse's motorcycles.
For a while, when Brian was known as Brian Christopher, his father Jerry Lawler would talk him up as being superior to all the other Light Heavyweights but never publicly acknowledge that Brian was his son, although after Paul Heyman revealed that fact on RAW, Jim Ross (Jerry's broadcast partner) always hinted at it. A notable example of this was during the Light Heavyweight Championship match at Judgement Day 1998 between Taka Michinoku and Christian, when Jerry Lawler reveals that he wants to see more of Brian Christopher - to which Ross replies "Haven't you got some baby photos?". Often a running joke was that someone (usually a commentator) would mention their relationship, which led to both of them adamantly denying that they were related.
In late 1999, Brian and Scott adopted the ring names Grandmaster Sexay and Scotty 2 Hotty, returning after a hiatus, and later becoming faces. Their tag team was renamed Too Cool, and were later joined by Rikishi, becoming three of the company's top fan favorites. They enjoyed an immensely popular run as Too Cool, as well as success in the tag team division, defeating Edge and Christian in May 2000 on Raw to become the Tag Team Champions. They were even occasionally involved with top-card feuds, notably being enemies to the McMahon-Helmsley Faction and their associates, such as The Radicalz, Edge and Christian, and T & A. The trio's run ended in late 2000 when Rikishi was revealed as the man behind the wheel of the car that hit Stone Cold Steve Austin at Survivor Series. Shortly after, Rikishi turned heel and turned on his teammates.
While Scotty was sidelined in 2001 with a broken ankle, Lawler formed a short-lived tag team with Steve Blackman and was later released from the company for illegally conveying drugs across the Canada–United States border.
On February 24, 2002, at the second WWA pay per view in Las Vegas, Lawler wrestled WWA Heavyweight Champion Jeff Jarrett for the title, but lost. In April 2002, Lawler wrestled in a fatal-four way match for the WWA World Heavyweight Championship at a house show for World Wrestling All-Stars but lost to Nathan Jones, Scott Steiner and Jeff Jarrett.
From June 2002 until April 2004, he worked for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling as Brian Lawler. He formed a group called Next Generation with fellow second generation stars David Flair and Erik Watts. They were involved in a rivalry with Dusty Rhodes and harassed him with a replica of the NWA World Title belt that he wore when he was champion.
In April 2004, Lawler was signed back to the WWE roster as Jim Ross's last act as WWE talent scout. He only appeared in four matches, one against Kane, one against Wavell Starr, one against Christian, and the last one against Garrison Cade. He was later released after only one month with the company. Prior to his release, Lawler was scheduled to take part in a Battle Royal for the number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship, but he was replaced by Maven.
After his departure from WWE, Lawler wrestled for several independent promotions, including Memphis Wrestling and UWF Live. While in UWF Live, Lawler reunited with Scotty 2 Hotty and they reformed Too Cool as Grandmaster Sexay and Scotty 2 Hotty respectively. On November 21, 2009, Lawler reunited with Rikishi, and the duo defeated Orlando Jordan and Umaga in a tag team match on the Hulkamania Tour of Australia in Melbourne. He also has appeared for Nashville-based promotion SAW in 2010.
Lawler was at an event called Slamfest 2013 in Cookeville, Tennessee on May 4, 2013, He was involved the tag team main event match with Fatu under their ring names Rikishi and Grand Master Sexay, Too Cool. They faced Tommy Dreamer and 2 Tuff Tony and won after Dreamer was accidentally hit by Tony in the face with a flaming vodka rag. Afterwards Fatu gave Tony a stinkface. Lawler attended an event called Summer Heat in Sparta, Tennessee, where he was in a tag team match with Hammer Jack against team IOU. He was in his Grandmaster Sexay attire and character. Lawler and Jack won the match and danced afterward.
Lawler appeared at Memphis Power Wrestling's Revenge at Resorts II Cool event in Tunica Resorts, Mississippi. He reunited with Scotty 2 Hotty to face Chase Stevens and Crimson. They won the match, but were then beat down by Cerebus, Doug Gilbert, and Bill Dundee.
On the March 14, 2011 episode of Raw, Lawler returned to the WWE as a heel in a segment between Michael Cole and his father, Jerry Lawler, where Brian would side with Cole, saying that he felt that Jerry never cared for him and that he was ashamed to be his son. Lawler indirectly agreed, telling Brian that he was a bigger screw-up than Charlie Sheen.
Lawler returned to the WWE on January 5, 2014, appearing on the "Old School" edition of Raw and reuniting with Rikishi and Scotty 2 Hotty to take on 3MB in six man tag team match. His team was successful in winning, turning Lawler back to a face in the process. He made an appearance on NXT Arrival in February 2014 as part of Too Cool in a losing effort as mystery opponents to The Ascension, who defended their NXT Tag Team Championship.
Lawler was arrested in February 2009 for disorderly conduct. On June 26, 2009, Lawler was arrested for public intoxication just before 3 am. According to the police report, Lawler "became very belligerent" once in custody, and threatened the police officer who arrested him. On July 13, 2009, Lawler was jailed for 30 days after failing to attend an in-patient treatment center as part of his plea agreement. Brian has been drug/alcohol free since October 2013. He concentrates on running his own independent wrestling shows as well as inspirational speaking at schools. Brian and his girlfriend of two years, Jessica Asberry Campbell, just recently got engaged. Brian proposed to Jessica in Scotland on February 14, 2015.
Finishing moves
Sexay Face Buster (Full nelson facebuster)
Hip Hop Drop / Tennessee Jam (Diving leg drop, with theatrics)
Signature moves
Dropkick, sometimes from the top rope
Sunset flip powerbomb
Superkick
With Scotty 2 Hotty
Double team finishing moves
Aided sitout powerbomb
Double team signature moves
Double elbow drop
Entrance themes
"Hangin' Tough" by New Kids on the Block (Used while teaming with Tony Williams)
"You Look Fly Today" by Jim Johnston (1999-2001)
"Turn It Up" (2001, 2004, 2011) by Jim Johnston
"Goin' Down" (2013–present) by Brian Christopher and Keith Sasser
Hoosier Pro Wrestling
HPW Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Doug Gilbert
Memphis Superstars of Wrestling
MSW Junior Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Memphis Wrestling
Memphis Wrestling Southern Heavyweight Championship (1 time, current)
Memphis Wrestling Television Championship (1 time)
National Wrestling Alliance
NWA North American Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Spellbinder
NWA New South
New South Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Powerhouse Championship Wrestling
PCW Light Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Lethal Attitude Wrestling
Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
Power Pro Wrestling
PPW Television Championship (1 time)
Pro Wrestling Illustrated
PWI ranked him #367 of the 500 best singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003
Ultimate Christian Wrestling
UCW Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Billy Jack
United States Wrestling Association
USWA Heavyweight Championship (26 times)
USWA Junior Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
USWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (8 times)
USWA Texas Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
USWA World Tag Team Championship (6 times) - with Big Black Dog (1), Scotty Anthony (1), Jeff Jarrett (2), Eddie Gilbert (1) and Wolfie D (1)
GWF Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times)
World Wrestling Federation
WWF Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Scotty 2 Hotty
