Yuichi Nishimura (西村 雄一, Nishimura Yūichi, born 17 April 1972) is a Japanese football referee. He has refereed in the Japanese J. League Division 1 since 1999 and has been a full international referee for FIFA since 2004. He recently became noticed for his work as referee of the opening game in the 2014 FIFA World Cup between hosts Brazil and Croatia and also 2014 AFC Champions League second-leg final.
Nishimura was the only Asian referee and one of Asian officials selected to officiate at the 2008 African Cup of Nations in Ghana along with assistant referees Toru Sagara from Japan and Jeong Hae-Sang from South Korea. He was not appointed to any more matches in the tournament by CAF after the quarter-final between Egypt and Angola after he failed to dismiss players from the latter team for pushing him. The entire Angolan team was banned for 5 years from certain jurisdictions for their part in the incident.
Nishimura was preselected as a referee for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. On 11 June 2010 he was the referee for the Uruguay against France game at the 2010 FIFA World Cup, along with fourth official Joel Aguilar and assistant referees Jeong Hae-Sang, and Toru Sagara. Nishimura produced the first red card of the tournament, when he sent Uruguay midfielder Nicolás Lodeiro off the field for two yellow cards.
On 2 July 2010, during the first quarter-final game between Brazil and the Netherlands at Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium in Port Elizabeth, Nishimura sent off Felipe Melo of Brazil in the 73rd minute of the game. On 11 July 2010, Nishimura was the 4th official for the final match of the World Cup, Netherlands vs. Spain. He refereed the final of the 2010 FIFA Club World Cup between Inter Milan and TP Mazembe.
On 13 November 2010, Nishimura was the referee for the final match of the 2010 AFC Champions League Final, Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma vs. Zob Ahan, at the National Stadium in Tokyo.
Nishimura officiated at the 2011 AFC Asian Cup.
At the 2012 Men's Olympic Football Tournament, Nishimura officiated the group stage matches between Brazil and Belarus and host Great Britain and Uruguay.
Nishimura was appointed for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. Nishimura was chosen by FIFA to referee the opening game between Brazil–Croatia. With this, he became only the third Japanese referee to officiate at two FIFA World Cup finals, after Shizuo Takada and Toru Kamikawa. In the match, Nishimura became the first referee to use vanishing spray at a World Cup finals, as well as to have access to goal-line technology.
The game ended with a 3–1 victory for hosts Brazil, with many commentators perceiving multiple controversial calls in favour of Brazil. These included a penalty kick awarded to Brazil in the 71st minute, converted for 2–1, a Croatia equaliser disallowed for goalkeeper interference in the 83rd minute for 2–2, and a yellow card on forward Neymar in the 26th minute considered lenient by various critics. Nishimura's performance received negative reviews, while Massimo Busacca, FIFA referees chief, defended the officials, insisting that there had been some contact between Lovren and Fred, even if it was minimal: "The left hand touched and then also the right. If you play with the hands out, the referee sees that clearly and decides one way.[...] we can discuss; was it enough (contact)?" However, he admitted that there were doubts as to whether Nishimura would be appointed to other games in the tournament. Croatia defender Vedran Ćorluka was critical of Nishimura's verbal skills, saying that he had never seen a referee who doesn't speak English—a requirement of World Cup referees—and that Nishimura "was speaking something in Japanese but no one could understand him." FIFA's marketing director Thierry Weil rejected suggestions that Brazil was favored by Nishimura.
Nishimura was appointed to two other games in the tournament as the fourth official: the Group E match between Honduras and Ecuador (2–1 win for Ecuador), and the third place play-off match between Brazil and the Netherlands (3–0 win for the Netherlands).
Nishimura was appointed to the second leg of the 2014 AFC Champions League Final in which Al-Hilal FC faced Western Sydney Wanderers FC. The match ended in a dramatic 0-0 upset which saw the Western Sydney Wanderers crowned AFC champions courtesy of their 1-0 victory in the first leg. During the match, Al-Hilal were denied three penalty claims, with two of the denials appearing to be mistakes made by Nishimura. He also failed to cite Nasser Al-Shamrani for clearly headbutting Matthew Spiranovic. After the match, the Al-Hilal board of directors called the appointment of Nishimura for the match "surprising" and said that what happened during the final was "a black spot in the history of Asian football". The AFC and FIFA both submitted negative reviews of Nishimura. On the Japanese Sports television station, an interview with Nishimura showed him stating that he made a mistake and three penalties should have been called for Al-Hilal.
Nishimura was chosen as the J. League Referee of the Year in 2009 and 2010.
In 2012, Nishimura was named Best Men's Referee of the Year by the Asian Football Confederation.
