Lu Yen-hsun (simplified Chinese: 卢彦勋; traditional Chinese: 盧彥勳; pinyin: Lú Yànxūn; born August 14, 1983) is a Taiwanese professional tennis player. He goes by the nickname Rendy. His favorite surface is hard court, though several of his ATP Tour career highlights have come on grass courts, including reaching the quarterfinals of the 2010 Wimbledon Championships.
Lu was an accomplished junior player, reaching as high as no. 3 in the ITF junior world singles rankings in February 2001 (and no. 9 in doubles). In his junior career, he compiled a singles win/loss record of 80–37 (63–34 in doubles) and defeated a handful of future ATP stars, including Robin Söderling, Mario Ančić, and Philipp Kohlschreiber.
Junior Slam results:
Australian Open: 1R (2001)
French Open: 1R (2000)
Wimbledon: 1R (2000)
US Open: 2R (2000)
In 2004, Lu became the first player from Taiwan to break into ATP Top 100, thanks to a solid performance in the Challenger circuit in the first half of 2004. He started to participate in many tour-level events. Although he suffered many defeats, his effort yielded some good wins. The most notable win came on the grass court in the Queen's Club Championships, where he gained his first top-10 win by defeating then world no. 3 Guillermo Coria.
A series of injuries caused his ranking to fall rapidly in 2005. He did not participate in any tournaments after withdrawing in the second round in Ho Chi Minh City.
Returning to the circuit, Lu enjoyed a solid performance throughout the season, and a late surge at the end of the season, advancing to semifinals or better in four consecutive Challengers (Rimouski, Busan, Caloundra, and Kawana). Lu lost in the final of Rimouski to his friend Kristian Pless. Two weeks later, Lu won the Caloundra challenger, beating Australia's Peter Luczak. The following week, Lu lost in the final to Julien Jeanpierre of France. Lu's hot streak moved him from no. 140 in the ATP in October to no. 89 at year-end.
In winter 2006, Lu was training with Rainer Schüttler and Janko Tipsarević in Dubai, under Dirk Hordorff. The training seems to yield good results, as Lu reached second round in Australian Open and his first ATP level quarter final in Memphis in 2007. By defeating Jürgen Melzer in 2nd round, Lu entered his first ATP level quarter final, but lost to eventual finalist Andy Roddick. With the strong performance in Memphis, Lu broke into top 80 in the ranking released on February 26, 2007.
In 2008, Lu did well on the Challenger circuit, taking home titles in Waikoloa, New Delhi and Tashkent, while reaching the finals of three other Challenger events. On the ATP tour, Lu booked a spot in the quarterfinals in San Jose by defeating Max Mirnyi in the first round and Wayne Odesnik in straight sets in the second round. He then lost to Radek Štěpánek in the quarter finals in two sets.
Perhaps Lu's best performance during the season came at the 2008 Beijing Olympics, representing Chinese Taipei. Lu shocked audiences by defeating then sixth ranked player in the world, Andy Murray, in straight sets in the first round. Lu continued his winning streak at the Olympics by defeating Agustín Calleri of Argentina to advance to the third round (Round of 16), but eventually lost to Jürgen Melzer of Austria.
At the 2009 Australian Open, Lu advanced to the third round of a Grand Slam tournament for the first time, defeating 10th seeded Argentinian player, David Nalbandian, in five sets in the second round. He lost to Tommy Robredo in the third round.
Lu, ranked 82, defeated former world no.1 Lleyton Hewitt in the first round of Delray Beach International Tennis Championships. He then lost to Stefan Koubek.
In May 2009, Lu won the US$100,000 Israel Open at Ramat HaSharon, beating German Benjamin Becker, who forced to retire.
Lu retired in his first round match against Mathieu Montcourt at Roland Garros, trailing 2–6.
He was defeated by Roger Federer in the first round of Wimbledon in three sets.
In November 2009, Lu won the US$100,000 Flea Market Cup at Chuncheon, beating Dutch player Igor Sijsling.
At Wimbledon, Lu became the first Taiwanese player to reach the quarter-finals of a Grand Slam, and the first man from Asia to reach the quarter-finals at a major in fifteen years. He made it to the fourth round without dropping a set defeating Horacio Zeballos, Michał Przysiężny, and Florian Mayer, with Mayer withdrawing in the third set. The unseeded Lu achieved the biggest of the upsets on "Manic Monday", by beating world #5 and fifth-seeded Andy Roddick (who was ranked 77 places higher than Lu) in 4 hours and 36 mins with the fifth set going to 9–7. He lost to No. 3 seed Novak Djokovic. Lu moved up 40 places to 42nd in the ATP after Wimbledon. The ATP named Lu's 4th round Wimbledon upset against Roddick as the biggest upset of 2010. At the beginning of November 2010, Lu reached a career-high ATP ranking of 33rd.
At the 2011 Farmers Classic, Lu defeated Robby Ginepri in the first round. He then defeated Marcos Baghdatis before losing to Ryan Harrison in the quarter finals. At the Odlum Brown Vancouver Open as the number one seeded player, defeating George Bastl in the first round before losing to Alex Bogdanovic. At the Rogers Cup, Lu lost to Bernard Tomic in the first round.
On 15 June 2012, Lu clinched a shock maiden victory with a third set tiebreak triumph over third seed Janko Tipsarević to reach the quarterfinals at Queen's Club.
Lu lost in the second round for all Grand Slam events which held in 2013.
On 10 January 2014, Lu made his maiden ATP final in Auckland against John Isner by defeating David Ferrer in the semifinals. He lost in the final 6–7(4–7), 6–7(7–9). During the 2014 Asian Games, the ATP threatened to fine and ban Lu for three years if he did not report to the China Open on September 29. He had signed up to participate in both events, but the final for the Asian Games did not take place until September 30, a schedule conflict the ATP would not accommodate. In response, Lu dropped out of the China Open. The ATP then announced that Lu would be fined, but not banned.
In 2015, Lu won his third doubles tournament with Jonathan Marray, at the 2015 Aircel Chennai Open. Lu also reached a career milestone by becoming only the second player in history to reach 300 career Challenger wins.
Current through the 2016 Wimbledon Championships.
* At the 2013 French Open, Lu withdrew prior to the second round
Current through the 2015 US Open.
Lu is sponsored by adidas (apparel and shoes), Head (rackets), Chunghwa Telecom and CPC Corporation. On court, Lu currently uses a Head IG Extreme Pro racket, Signum Poly Pro strings, and a Tournagrip overgrip.
Sport in Taiwan
