The División Profesional de la Asociación Paraguaya de Fútbol (locally: [diβiˈsjon pɾofesjoˈnal de la asosjaˈsjon paɾaˈɣwaʝa ðe ˈfutβol]; Professional Division of the Paraguayan Football Association), also known as the Primera División [pɾiˈmeɾa ðiβiˈsjon] (first division), or due to sponsorship reasons Copa TIGO [ˈkopa ˈtiɣo], is the top-flight professional football league in Paraguay. Currently, there are 12 teams in the first division.
The most successful club is Olimpia, with 40 championships. The Apertura 2015 champion was Cerro Porteño. IFFHS ranked the league as the ninth strongest in the world in 2012, and the eleventh strongest in the world in 2013.
Liga Paraguaya's first game was played in 1906, after the director of the El Diario newspaper, Don Adolfo Riquelme, brought to his office on 18 June 1906, the representatives of the five existing football teams in Paraguay at that time (Olimpia, Guaraní, Libertad, General Díaz, and Nacional) to create the governing body of football in Paraguay: the Liga Paraguaya de Fútbol (known today as Asociación Paraguaya de Fútbol). The representatives were William Paats and Junio Godoy (Olimpia) Ramón Caballero, Manuel Bella and Salvador Melián (Guaraní), Juan Escalada (Libertad), César Urdapilleta (General Díaz), and Vicente Gadea (Nacional). The Liga Paraguaya saw Club Guaraní as the first champion in 1906, after defeating Olimpia in the final.
The Primera División was founded in 1906 with 5 teams, and turned professional in 1935 when 10 clubs broke away from the amateur leagues to form a professional league. Since 1996 the format of tournament was changed to Torneo Apertura and Clausura, but since 2008 each tournament is independent.
Traditionally, the dominance of Olimpia and Cerro Porteño went mostly unchallenged for decades. All of this changed at the turn of the 21st century. Since then, Libertad has been the most dominant club, while Nacional and Guarani have also experienced success at the local level.
The system of the tournaments is round-robin. 12 teams play two rounds of 11 dates either away or home games, in total 22 dates in each tournament. Each year tournaments are divided in two independents tournaments: the Torneo Apertura (Opening Tournament) from February to July, and the Torneo Clausura (Closing Tournament) from July to December.
Relegation is based on an averaging system. At the end of each season, the two teams with the worst three-year averages are relegated, and the two best teams in the "División Intermedia" (second division) are promoted to Primera División.
Since 2012, Paraguay have seven slots in international cups (three in the Copa Libertadores de America and four in the Copa Sudamericana). These seven slots will be filled by five teams.
In the Copa Libertadores, the winner of the Apertura and Clausura tournaments qualify automatically. The third representative (going into the first round play-off) is the best placed non-champion from the cumulative table of both the Apertura and Clausura.
In the Copa Sudamericana, the champion of the Apertura and Clausura tournaments qualify, with the 4th and 5th best placed teams from the Apertura and Clausura cumulatives.
The following are the teams in the first division in 2016:
Football in Paraguay
Paraguayan football league system
División Intermedia
Paraguayan Tercera División
Paraguayan Primera División B
Primera División B Nacional
Paraguayan Cuarta División
Campeonato Nacional de Interligas
Unión del Fútbol del Interior
Paraguayan women's football championship
Football Federation of the 1st Department Concepción
Football Federation of the 2nd Department San Pedro
Football Federation of the 3rd Department Cordillera
Football Federation of the 4th Department Guairá
Football Federation of the 5th Department Caaguazú
Football Federation of the 6th Department Caazapá
Football Federation of the 7th Department Itapúa
Football Federation of the 8th Department Misiones
Football Federation of the 9th Department Paraguarí
Football Federation of the 10th Department Alto Paraná
Football Federation of the 11th Department Central
Football Federation of the 12th Department Ñeembucú
Football Federation of the 13th Department Amambay
Football Federation of the 14th Department Canindeyú
Football Federation of the 15th Department Presidente Hayes
Football Federation of the 16th Department Alto Paraguay
Football Federation of the 17th Department Boquerón
