The International Tennis Hall of Fame is located in Newport, Rhode Island, United States. It honors players and contributors to the sport of tennis and includes a museum, grass tennis courts, an indoor tennis facility, and a court tennis (or real tennis) facility.
The hall of fame and museum are located in the Newport Casino, which was commissioned in 1880 by James Gordon Bennett, Jr. as an exclusive resort for the rich and wealthy, and was designed by Charles McKim along with Stanford White, who did the interiors. By the 1950s, the retreat was struggling financially and was in danger of being demolished for modern retail space.
The United States Lawn Tennis Association had held its first championships at the Newport Casino in 1881, an event that would continue through 1914, by which time tennis had become the key attraction at the resort. In 1954, Jimmy Van Alen established the Tennis Hall of Fame and Museum in the Casino. The combination of tennis matches and the museum allowed the building to be saved. It is an example of Victorian Shingle Style architecture.
Van Alen intended the facility to be "a shrine to the ideals of the game", and was elected president of the hall in 1957. The International Tennis Hall of Fame was officially sanctioned by the United States Tennis Association on its foundation in 1954, and recognized by the International Tennis Federation in 1986. The first Hall of Fame members were inducted in 1955; as of 2010, there are 218 inductees from 19 countries.
Martina Hingis became the first Global Ambassador for the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 2015.
The museum houses a vast collection of artifacts and memorabilia – including videos, photographs, audio recordings, tennis equipment and apparel, trophies, and art – highlighting the history of tennis from its origins up through the modern era. The collection is displayed year-round in the museum's 13,000 square feet (1,200 m2) of exhibit space.
For a description of each award and a list of its recipients, see footnote.
Chairman's Award
Davis Cup Award of Excellence
Eugene L. Scott Award
Fed Cup Award of Excellence
Golden Achievement Award
Joseph F. Cullman 3rd Award
Samuel Hardy Award
Tennis Educational Merit Award
The Hall of Fame hosts several tournaments, including the Hall of Fame Tennis Championships. Part of the men's ATP World Tour, the tournament is the only grass court event in North America. Top male players come to Newport directly from Wimbledon to compete for the Van Alen Cup at the International Tennis Hall of Fame. Past champions include Americans John Isner, and Mardy Fish, as well as two-time champion Fabrice Santoro of France.
For a list of inductees—alphabetically, by country, and by year of induction—see footnote.
Note: Inductees are listed below in two categories (Player category and #Contributor category).
note - Bob Hewitt of South Africa was inducted into the Tennis Hall of Fame in 1992, but he was suspended indefinitely in 2012 and expelled from the Hall in 2016 after being convicted of child sexual offences.
Tenniseum
