The Hong Kong Football Association Limited (Chinese: 香港足球總會), often abbreviated to the HKFA, is the governing body of association football in Hong Kong. Its current chairman is Brian Leung Hung-Tak and its Chief Executive Officer is Mark Sutcliffe.
British people introduced modern football to Hong Kong in the 18th Century. The HKFA established in 1914, it is one of the oldest Football Federations in Asia and is responsible for organising various football competitions including professional and amateur leagues, football development and promoting football in Hong Kong.
In 1954, HKFA joined FIFA, and was also one of twelve founding associations of the Asian Football Confederation. Hong Kong played an important role in the early development of Asian football, and was given the honour of hosting the first Asian Cup competition in 1956, in which Hong Kong came third in the tournament.
Despite being a part of the British Empire, and, more recently part of the People's Republic of China, Hong Kong fields a separate FIFA-recognised representative team.
HKFA is also responsible for operating the Hong Kong national football team (Chinese: 香港足球代表隊), which represents Hong Kong and competes in international football events.
HKFA's president is Timothy Fok SBS JP. The association is currently led by chairman Brian Leung Hung-tak.
Project Phoenix is a government-supported project. It is a strategy and action plan to reform Hong Kong football from top to bottom.
Former the FA executive director David Davies led the team of change agent - Scott Wilson Group, which was appointed by Hong Kong Football Association in September 2010 to carry out the reform and restructuring of football in Hong Kong.
On 21 November 2011, HKFA named Gordon McKie as its Chief Executive Officer (CEO). Gordon, the former Chairman of the Scottish Rugby Union, had served HKFA for only ten months and resign from his post in September 2012 with personal reasons.
On 17 December 2011, HKFA appointed Ernie Merrick as the National Head Coach of Hong Kong Football Team. Merrick told to media that he felt honor to have an opportunity to participate the development and growing of Hong Kong football. Merrick won two titles in six season for Melbourne Victory. He started his new role on 9 January 2012.
On 23 December 2011, Kim Pan-Gon named National Academy Coach. Coach Kim will be wholly responsible for the identification, development and coaching of all players aged 18 and below.
On 17 April 2012, Australian Steve O'Connor was appointed as the new technical director. The former head coach of the football program at the Australian Institute of Sport will take up his new post in will be responsible to improve the standards of local coaching, referee development, community and youth football activities and women's football. He will also oversee the implementation of elite player development pathways from grassroots football to senior international level.
On 17 September 2012, HKFA appointed Mark Sutcliffe to replace Gordon Mckie as the CEO of HKFA.
On 7 February 2013, the Hong Kong Football Association stated that the new Premier League would get under way in Autumn 2014, where it was suggested that the 2013–14 season would be a transition year.
On 28 May 2013, HKFA promoted Korean coach Kim Pan-Gon to replace Ernie Merrick as the head coach of Hong Kong national team.
In June 2015, The Government turned green light to build a national training centre in Tseung Kwan O. The budget of construction will be fully supported by the Hong Kong Jockey Club. The centre will be operated by HKFA in 2017.
On 29 November 2015, Asian Football Confederation awarded the AFC Developing Member Association of the Year award to Hong Kong Football Association in recognition of its professional administration and governance as well its exceptional contribution to the development and promotion of the game at all levels within the country.
Hong Kong national football team
Hong Kong Premier League
Hong Kong Senior Challenge Shield
Hong Kong FA Cup
Hong Kong League Cup
