Karin Knapp (born 28 June 1987) is an Italian professional tennis player.
Knapp has won two titles on the WTA tour, as well as five singles and six doubles titles on the ITF tour in her career. On 24 August 2015, she reached her best singles ranking of world number 33. On 28 September 2015, she peaked at world number 49 in the doubles rankings.
As a member of the Italian Fed Cup team, Knapp was part of the winning squad in 2013 and has a win-loss record of 3–3.
At the 2007 French Open, her first Grand Slam tournament, she reached the third round in the singles event, beating 22nd-seeded Alona Bondarenko. In the third round, she lost to 14th-seeded Patty Schnyder of Switzerland.
At the 2007 US Open, she defeated Chan Yung-jan to reach the second round where she lost to American wildcard Ahsha Rolle.
Knapp reached her first WTA Tour final in 2008 in Antwerp. She lost there to world no. 1 and home favorite Justine Henin.
At the 2008 French Open, she lost in the third round to top-seeded Maria Sharapova.
Her biggest ITF Women's Circuit final came in 2007 in Biella, where she was beaten by Agnieszka Radwańska.
At the 2013 Wimbledon Championships, Knapp reached the fourth round of a Grand Slam event for the first time. but was defeated by Marion Bartoli, the eventual champion. She was on the winning Fed Cup team, winning her doubles match with partner Flavia Pennetta in the finals.
One of Knapp's biggest professional matches came at the 2014 Australian Open, where she lost in a tough second-round encounter with Maria Sharapova. Despite the loss, Knapp was praised for her determination and fighting spirit against the four-time Grand Slam champion.
Knapp won her first WTA title at the 2014 Tashkent Open, defeating Bojana Jovanovski in the final.
Like Andreas Seppi, Knapp comes from the largely German-speaking northern Italian province of South Tyrol. She maintains her residence in the German-speaking village of Luttach and speaks German, Italian and English. Her father, Alois, is a fabric manufacturer and her mother a retired school teacher. She has two brothers. She admires Kim Clijsters and she lives in Rome, where she trains
She defeated for the first time in her career a former n* 1, Victoria Azarenka, during the opening match of the French Open 2016
