The 2010 Allsvenskan, part of the 2010 Swedish football season, was the 86th Allsvenskan season. It began on 13 March 2010 and ended on 7 November 2010. AIK were the defending champions. Malmö FF secured their 16th title in the last round after winning with 2-0 against Mjällby AIF.
Source: svenskfotboll.se (Swedish)
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1Helsingborg qualified for the Third qualifying round of the Europa League as Svenska Cupen champions 2010.2Örebro qualified for the Second qualifying round of the Europa League as they received Helsingborgs initial qualifying spot.3Elfsborg qualified for the Europa League as they received Örebro's initial qualifying spot.4Sweden was among the best three associations in the UEFA Fair Play ranking and thus received an additional spot in the first qualifying round of the Europa League, Häcken received the qualifying spot for their ranking in Allsvenskans Fair Play ranking.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Gefle won 3–0 on aggregate.
Note: Some matches are played out of phase with the corresponding round, positions are corrected in hindsight.
Last updated: 24 May 2014
Source: [1] (Swedish)
Source: svenskfotboll.se (Swedish)
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
Including matches played on 31 October 2010; Source: fotbollskanalen
20 goals
 Alexander Gerndt (Gefle/Helsingborg)
19 goals
 Denni Avdić (Elfsborg)
12 goals
 Mathias Ranégie (Häcken)
11 goals
 Agon Mehmeti (Malmö)
10 goals
 Ricardo Santos (Kalmar)
 Moestafa El Kabir (Mjällby)
 Tobias Hysén (IFK Göteborg)
 Daniel Larsson (Malmö)
9 goals
 Daniel Mendes (Kalmar)
 Kennedy Igboananike (Djurgården)
A. ^ After the victory in the relegation play-off against Assyriska FF in the last match of the 2009 season, supporters of Djurgården stormed the pitch, with at least one player in Assyriska being attacked by hooligans. As a penalty, Djurgårdens IF had to pay a fine of 200,000 SEK and play their next home match (the first of the 2010 season) without any spectators.
