The Turkish Grand Prix (Turkish: Türkiye Grand Prix'si) was a Formula One motor race that was first held on August 21, 2005 as part of the 2005 Formula One season and last held on 8 May 2011 as part of the 2011 Formula One season. It was held at Istanbul Park Circuit, designed by Hermann Tilke. The circuit is an anticlockwise circuit.
Because of the nature of the circuit the 2005 Turkish Grand Prix weekend saw exciting on-track action, with many drivers spinning off throughout the weekend due to pushing too hard, particularly at Turn 8 where Juan Pablo Montoya ran wide with two laps to go following a tangle with the Jordan of Tiago Monteiro. This allowed Fernando Alonso to take second place behind Kimi Räikkönen, an event which had a significant bearing on their battle for the World Championship headed towards its culmination.
A year later, Felipe Massa took his first pole position and victory at Istanbul. The Ferraris were 1-2 in early stages of the race, with Massa ahead of Michael Schumacher. Vitantonio Liuzzi's spin brought out the safety car and the Ferraris had to pit on the same lap. Alonso was able to get past Schumacher and the order stayed until the end of the race. Massa repeated in 2007 ahead of his new team-mate Räikkönen.
In 2008, the race was held in May. Two-stopping Massa won the race ahead of three-stopping Lewis Hamilton, although Hamilton had passed him during the race.
For 2011, the race was put in doubt because Bernie Ecclestone wanted to double the fees for hosting the race. However Ecclestone confirmed that 2011 would have a 20-race calendar; no races would be taken off and there would be the addition of the Indian Grand Prix.
On 30 July 2011 it was announced that the Turkish Grand Prix would not be on the calendar from 2012 due to a lack of agreement on the annual cost. On January 9, 2013 Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan chose not to approve the Formula 1 deal that would have held the race in Istanbul in 2013.
The project, set to cost Turkey around 20 million dollars in total, needed to receive 13 million dollars of state funding. Erdoğan, however, did not give his approval, and the project fell through.
As part of the podium ceremony after the 2006 race, the winner's trophy was presented by Mehmet Ali Talat, who was introduced to television viewers via the captions as the president of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, a state which is recognised only by Turkey. The FIA announced they would be investigating this incident, as a possible breach of the organisation's political neutrality. The identity of the person who would present the winner's trophy was left to the last minute, leaving the FIA no time to veto the choice. Some commentators feared this incident could jeopardise the future of the Turkish Grand Prix, and possibly also Turkey's round of the World Rally Championship, another FIA-sanctioned series. It was concluded with a 5 million dollar fine, which was later reduced by half.
2006–2008: Petrol Ofisi Turkish Grand Prix
2009: ING Turkish Grand Prix
2010: Panasonic Turkish Grand Prix
2011: DHL Turkish Grand Prix
Embolded drivers are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.
Embolded constructors are competing in the Formula One championship in the current season.
All Turkish Grand Prix were held at Istanbul Park.
