Alberto Facundo "Tino" Costa (born 9 January 1985) is an Argentinian footballer. Costa operates as a midfielder and is known for his technical skill, penalty-taking, his free kick ability and his pin-point passing.
Costa, commonly known as Tino, began his career in Argentina playing for local club La Terrazza. At the age of 17, he made the highly risky decision of leaving the country for the island of Guadeloupe to play for Racing Club de Basse-Terre in the Guadeloupe Division d'Honneur. Costa spent two years at the island club helping the club win the league and cup double. He played in the 2004 edition of the Coupe de Guadeloupe final helping his club defeat AS Gosier by a score of 3–1. His great play caught the attention of Racing Club de Paris, who offered the player a trial. Racing, who were playing in the third-tier National, signed the player and Costa played one season for the club appearing in 28 total matches scoring 3 goals. The following season, he joined Pau FC, another club in the National. At Pau, Costa appeared in 39 total matches scoring 4 goals with Pau barely avoiding relegation in both years he spent there. After leaving Pau, Costa joined his third National club in FC Sète. There, he became a household name in the league appearing in 29 total matches scoring 3 goals helping Sète come within seven points of promotion. He also assisted on several goals and collected nine yellow cards. For his efforts, he was named the league's top player, which led to interest from clubs in the higher divisions.
Costa signed with Montpellier of Ligue 2 for the 2008–09 season, after agreeing to a three-year contract. He made his debut for the club in their opening match of the season, playing the full 90 minutes in their loss to Strasbourg. He scored his first career goal for the club a few weeks later in their 4–0 demolition of Reims. He was held scoreless for the majority of the fall season, before returning to form mid-season scoring a brace against Boulogne. In a span of six weeks, during the latter part of the season, Costa scored goals against Dijon, Châteauroux, Brest, and Clermont. As a result, Montpellier were among the head of the pack for promotion to Ligue 1. The club's future was determined on the final day of the season with a 2–1 victory over Strasbourg, who were also fighting for promotion. Costa scored the eventual game-winning goal in the 19th minute helping Montpellier return to Ligue 1 play. For the entire season, Costa scored 8 goals and assisted on 11 goals. He was nominated for the Ligue 2 Player of the Year award, but lost out to the Cameroonian Paul Alo'o.
Following the season, several Ligue 1 clubs began inquiring for Costa's services, most notably RC Lens and Toulouse. However, Costa refuted any claims of leaving the city of Montpellier and signed a contract extension on 1 July 2009 until the year 2013. Despite missing the club's opening 1–1 draw with Paris Saint-Germain, Costa made his Ligue 1 debut against Lorient scoring the club's opening goal in the 60th minute. The match ended in a 2–2 draw. The following week, he scored again, this time in a 2–0 victory over Sochaux. Two weeks later, he converted a 39th-minute penalty against Lens. The goal turned out to be the winner.
On 1 July 2010, Costa joined La Liga club Valencia on a four-year contract for a transfer fee of €6.5 million. He scored his first goal for Valencia on his debut in the UEFA Champions League. The midfielder shot accurately from 30 yards out, and Valencia went on to win 0–4 at Bursaspor. He scored his first league goal for Valencia against Getafe on 14 November 2010. On 18 December he scored his second league goal from 35 yards out when he converted a free-kick against Real Sociedad.
On 5 June 2013 it was announced that Costa left Valencia to go to Russian giants Spartak Moscow for €7M transfer fee.
It was confirmed that Costa would join Serie A side Genoa for the 2015-16 season.
On 15 January 2016 Fiorentina had confirmed the 6-month loan signing of Costa with the view to a permanent option at the end of the season.
(Correct as of 6 January 2016)
