The 2014 African Nations Championship was the third African Nations Championship football tournament. The 16 national teams featured players from the respective national championships. The tournament took place between 11 January and 1 February 2014 in South Africa. Originally, the tournament was to be hosted in Libya. This was the first African Nations Championship tournament where all matches were considered full international matches.
Hosts South Africa were knocked out in the group stages, which has been attributed to the national league not pausing during the tournament. Many clubs wouldn't release their players. CAF announced a rule change for future versions of the tournament.
The CHAN 2014 official draw was conducted at the CAF Headquarters on 18 September 2013 in Egypt.
The host cities were announced on 4 May 2012. Polokwane, Bloemfontein, and Cape Town will host the tournament. As the CEO of the LOC, said: "We are not going to let the success of Orange AFCON 2013 get into our heads and we are not taking anything for granted. We are applying the same formula we used during AFCON as well as the lessons learnt to make sure that Orange CHAN 2014 delivers in accordance with our objectives as well as CAF expectations. We are still going to return to the host cities for another round of visits as the LOC, at the end of August and again in November, together with CAF again. This is how serious we take this competition. We also share the same sentiments expressed by the CAF Vice President and Deputy Secretary General of CAF and we are pleased with what we have seen so far.".
All times are local (UTC+02:00). 
Tiebreakers
The teams are ranked according to points (3 points for a win, 1 point for a tie, 0 points for a loss). If tied on points, tiebreakers are applied in the following order:
Greater number of points obtained in the matches between the concerned teams;
Best Goal difference resulting from the matches between the concerned teams;
Goal difference in all group matches;
Greatest number of goals scored in all group matches;
Fair Play point system in which the number of yellow and red cards are evaluated;
Drawing of lots by CAF Organising Committee.
In the knockout stage, if a match is level at the end of normal playing time, extra time is played (two periods of 15 minutes each) and followed, if necessary, by kicks from the penalty mark to determine the winner, except for the third place match where no extra time is played.
Golden boot
 Bernard Parker (4)
Player of the tournament
 Ejike Uzoenyi
4 goals
3 goals
2 goals
1 goal
The winner of the 3rd Edition of Orange African Nations Championship in South Africa pocketed USD 750, 000 while the runner-up got USD 400,000. The Confederation of African Football (CAF) revealed the prize money ahead of the knock-out phase of CHAN 2014 tournament which took place in South Africa from 11- January till 1 February.
A total of 16 national shared $3.2 million, the rest of the prizes are as follows.
