Jerrel Floyd Hasselbaink (born 27 March 1972), known as Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink, is a Dutch former professional footballer, now manager of Championship club Queens Park Rangers.
A striker, he began his career with Telstar and AZ, before leaving the Netherlands for Portuguese club Campomaiorense in August 1995. He joined Boavista the following year, and won the Taça de Portugal with the club in 1997. Later that year he was signed by English side Leeds United for a £2 million fee, and went on to win the Premier League Golden Boot award in 1998–99. He was sold on to Spanish club Atlético Madrid for £10 million in 1999, and reached the final of the Copa del Rey with Atlético despite the club also suffering relegation from La Liga.
Hasselbaink returned to the Premier League with Chelsea for a club record £15 million fee in May 2000. He scored 23 league goals in his first season, which earned him a second Premier League Golden Boot. He also played in the 2002 FA Cup Final and made a career high second-place league finish in 2003–04. He moved to Middlesbrough on a free transfer in July 2004, and played in the final of the UEFA Cup in 2006. He signed with Charlton Athletic in July 2006, before joining Cardiff City in August 2007. He played on the losing side in the 2008 FA Cup Final before retiring. He also scored nine goals in 23 matches in a four-year international career for the Netherlands national team, and appeared at the 1998 FIFA World Cup.
In May 2013 he was appointed manager of Royal Antwerp in the Belgian Second Division, where he stayed for one season. In November 2014, he was hired by Burton Albion, and in his first season he led them to their first ever promotion to League One as champions of League Two. In December 2015, he was appointed manager of Queens Park Rangers.
Hasselbaink was born on 27 March 1972 in Paramaribo, Suriname (then part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands) to Frank Ware and Cornelli Hasselbaink; he was the youngest of six children. At the age of three Hasselbaink was run over by a moped which broke his right leg. In October 1978, his mother took him and three siblings to live in Zaandam, Netherlands; his father remained in Suriname and rarely contacted the family. The next year Hasselbaink began playing youth football for Gestaagt Volharding Overwint (GVO), initially as a goalkeeper. He later played for Zaansche Football club (ZFC) and Zaanlandia as a right winger. He joined a street gang as a teenager and spent three months in a youth detention facility for stealing. After his release he joined the youth team at DWS, but was dismissed from the club for stealing the watch of a first-team player. He began his senior career with Telstar, while still a gang member, and had disciplinary issues at the club due to his persistent lateness. He made his Eerste Divisie debut on 27 October 1990, in a 2–0 defeat at VVV-Venlo. Head coach Niels Overweg sacked him after he turned up late to a match.
He began training with AZ, where his brother Carlos was playing, and impressed enough to win a professional contract. However Head coach Henk Wullems opted not to renew his contract in 1993, despite Hasselbaink making 46 appearances for the club. He had an unsuccessful trial with FC Eindhoven, and after failing to agree terms with PEC Zwolle he instead spent the 1993–94 season training with HFC Haarlem. He then played amateur football for Neerlandia whilst he looked abroad for a professional contract, spending time in Austria with Admira Wacker.
He signed for newly promoted Portuguese Primeira Divisão side Campomaiorense in August 1995 after impressing trainer Manuel Fernandes on a trial. The chairman wanted to keep his signing a secret, and so told the press that he had simply signed a player called "Jimmy", but after his signing was revealed the name stuck and he was known as Jimmy rather than Jerrel for the rest of his career. He failed to score in his first four games and missed a penalty in his fifth game after insisting on taking the penalty ahead of regular taker Stanimir Stoilov, however he made amends for the miss later in the game by scoring both goals a 2–0 win over Gil Vicente. The small club could not survive in the top-flight and were relegated in the 1995–96 season.
Hasselbaink was signed by Boavista for a €300,000 fee in summer 1996. The 1996–97 season was chaotic for the club, as the chairman sacked two managers, Zoran Filipović and João Resende Alves, before ending the campaign with Rui Casaca. As a result, the "Panthers" only managed a seventh-place finish, but ended the campaign on a high note by winning the Taça de Portugal. Hasselbaink had a good season individually, finishing as the league's second highest scorer behind Porto's Mário Jardel. He scored his first professional hat-trick at the club, in a 3–1 victory over Marítimo at the Estádio do Bessa; he later scored a hat-trick in a 7–0 win over Gil Vicente, as did teammate Nuno Gomes. Though head coach Casaca left Hasselbaink on the bench due to his arranged transfer to Leeds, Hasselbaink entered the final of the Taça de Portugal as a late substitute for Erwin Sánchez as Boavista held on to a 3–1 win over Benfica.
Leeds United manager George Graham signed Hasselbaink in the summer of 1997 for a fee of £2 million. He scored on his Premier League debut in a 1–1 draw with Arsenal at Elland Road on 9 August, though initially he struggled to adapt to the pace of the English game. He scored only five league goals before Christmas, but ended the campaign with 26 goals in all competitions following a strong second half of the season.
The following season, Hasselbaink's 18 goals in 36 appearances made him joint-winner (with Michael Owen and Dwight Yorke) of the Premier League Golden Boot as Leeds finished fourth in the league under the stewardship of new manager David O'Leary, thus winning the "Whites" a place in the following year's UEFA Champions League qualification stages. However he and his agent were dissatisfied with the contract offered by the club, and though he still had two years to run on his existing deal he was sold on. O'Leary claimed that "What he is looking for I don't think any club in the country could afford and I don't think there is anyone on that kind of money over here (in England)".
Hasselbaink was bought by Spanish club Atlético Madrid for £10 million in the middle of 1999. The "Red-and-Whites" lost the first three La Liga games of the 1999–2000 season, but after Hasselbaink scored his first goal for the club to secure a point at Real Zaragoza he continued to score important goals for the club. On 30 October, he scored twice in the Madrid derby as Atlético beat Real Madrid at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium for the first time in nine years. He also scored against Barcelona at Camp Nou, in a 2–1 league defeat. Manager Claudio Ranieri aimed to qualify for the Champions League, but resigned in February following poor results. Despite this Hasselbaink shared the league's Silver Boot award with Catanha (Málaga CF), scoring only three goals fewer than top-scorer Salva Ballesta (Racing de Santander). Atlético reached the final of the Copa del Rey at the Mestalla Stadium, but lost 2–1 to Espanyol; Hasselbaink scored a late consolation goal. The club's league form did not improve following Ranieri's departure, and his successor Radomir Antić failed to prevent the club from being relegated into the Segunda División. A relegation clause in his four-year contract allowed Hasselbaink to leave the club in the summer.
Hasselbaink returned to the Premier League in May 2000, when he was signed by Chelsea, for a club record fee of £15 million, which matched the then-transfer record for an English club; he signed a four-year contract. He scored on his "Blues" debut, helping them to win the 2000 FA Charity Shield with a 2–0 win over Manchester United at Wembley Stadium. Manager Gianluca Vialli was sacked in September, and Hasselbaink's former Madrid boss Claudio Ranieri was appointed as his replacement. Hasselbaink later stated he was "dismayed" at Vialli's sacking, and that the players hated Ranieri and fitness coach Roberto Sassi's running-focused training methods. Despite this Hasselbaink scored 23 goals in 35 league appearances in the 2000–01 season, including four goals in a 6–1 win against Coventry City on 21 October; he finished the season as the winner of the Premier League Golden Boot.
At the start of the 2001–02 season he earned the distinction of scoring the first competitive goal at Southampton's new St Mary's Stadium as Chelsea won 2–0 on 25 August. On 13 March, he scored a hat-trick as Chelsea defeated Tottenham Hotspur 4–0. He formed both a good friendship and a productive partnership with Icelandic striker Eiður Guðjohnsen, scoring 29 goals in all competitions whilst Guðjohnsen scored 23 goals in a season which also saw Chelsea reach the FA Cup final after overcoming Norwich City, West Ham United, Preston North End, Tottenham Hotspur, and Fulham. Hasselbaink was a doubt for the final due to a hamstring injury, and was substituted on 68 minutes at the Millennium Stadium as Chelsea lost 2–0 to rivals Arsenal. His total of 23 league goals was one fewer than Golden Boot winner Thierry Henry.
In summer 2002 the cause of his hamstring injury was discovered, and he underwent an operation to relieve a blockage in the arteries of his right leg which had been severely restricting circulation. During his recovery he appeared as a pundit for ITV's coverage of the 2002 FIFA World Cup. Ranieri initiated a squad rotation system for the 2002–03 season, but focused the team around Gianfranco Zola, which limited Hasselbaink's playing time. Barcelona manager Louis van Gaal agreed an £8 million transfer for Hasselbaink in the January transfer window after months of negotiations but was sacked before the transfer went through and the deal subsequently collapsed. Though the attack was focused on Zola throughout the season Hasselbaink managed to score 15 goals in 44 games, only one goal less than Zola.
In the 2003–04 season he scored 18 goals in all competitions which, despite the arrival of new strikers Adrian Mutu and Hernán Crespo, made him top-scorer at the club for the third time in four years. On 27 March, his 32nd birthday, Hasselbaink came on as a 60th-minute substitute for Geremi Njitap and scored a hat-trick as Chelsea came from behind to beat Wolverhampton Wanderers 5–2 at Stamford Bridge. Chelsea finished the season in second place and reached the semi-finals of the Champions League; Hasselbaink played in both legs of the semi-final defeat to AS Monaco, as Chelsea lost 5–3 on aggregate.
In July 2004, Hasselbaink turned down approaches from Fulham, Celtic and Rangers and instead joined Middlesbrough on a two-year contract after a free transfer. Due to several other internationals being signed by the club at the time, he predicted that Middlesbrough could qualify for the Champions League. On 14 August, he scored on his debut for the club in a 2–2 draw with Newcastle United at the Riverside Stadium. In the 2004–05 season he finished as the club's top-scorer with 13 goals in 36 Premier League games, including a hat-trick in a 4–0 win over Blackburn Rovers at Ewood Park on 16 October. A seventh-place league finish was enough for the club to qualify for the following year's UEFA Cup.
In the 2005–06 season he scored ten goals in 22 league games and scored eight goals in 22 cup appearances. He helped Steve McClaren's "Boro" to defeat Skoda Xanthi (Greece), Grasshopper Club Zürich (Switzerland), Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk (Ukraine), Litex (Bulgaria), VfB Stuttgart (Germany), A.S. Roma (Italy), FC Basel (Switzerland) and Steaua București (Romania) en route to the UEFA Cup final. In the final Middlesbrough were beaten 4–0 by Spanish club Sevilla at the Philips Stadion. The cup final proved to be Hasselbaink's last appearance for the club, as new manager Gareth Southgate decided to release him in July 2006.
After a potential move to Celtic of the Scottish Premier League broke down, Hasselbaink joined his fourth Premier League team, Charlton Athletic, on a free transfer in July 2006. Soon after joining the club, he was charged by the FA with improper conduct and/or bringing the game into disrepute for his claiming Chelsea paid players a bonus after the 2004 Champions League win over Arsenal; a Premier League inquiry into what would have been illegal bonus payments found no evidence to support the claims, which were denied by Chelsea. He scored his first goal for the "Addicks" against his old team Chelsea in a 2–1 defeat at Stamford Bridge on 9 September. After seven games without a goal, Hasselbaink scored against yet another of his former clubs, Middlesbrough on 13 January, a game which Middlesbrough went on to win 3–1. He was released by Charlton at the end of the 2006–07 season having scored only four goals in 29 games, with half of his goal tally coming against League One side Chesterfield in the League Cup.
Hasselbaink was on the verge of joining Championship side Leicester City in August 2007, but the club later withdrew their offer. Instead Cardiff City chairman Peter Ridsdale, who worked with Hasselbaink at Leeds United, brought him to Cardiff on a one-year deal, putting him in a veteran strike partnership with Robbie Fowler. Manager Dave Jones said that Hasselbaink initially took time to settle and become match fit but despite being a demanding player his professionalism was ultimately a positive influence. On 19 September, Hasselbaink scored his first goal for Cardiff with a 20-yard low drive in the 2–1 league defeat to Watford at Ninian Park. He was nominated for the Player of the Round in the Fifth Round of the FA Cup after scoring an impressive goal against Wolverhampton Wanderers. He remained as a regular starter for the "Bluebirds" throughout the 2007–08 season, and made appearances in five of the six matches Cardiff played to reach the FA Cup final. In the final Cardiff lost 1–0 to Portsmouth; Hasselbaink played 70 minutes before being substituted for Steve Thompson. As the season finished he entered talks to extend his stay at Cardiff, however he left the club in July 2008 following a dispute over pay.
Hasselbaink came to the attention of Netherlands manager Guus Hiddink whilst playing in England for Leeds United, and made his international debut on 27 May 1998 in a 0–0 draw in a friendly with Cameroon at the GelreDome in Arnhem; he came on as a 61st-minute substitute for Marc Overmars. On 1 June he scored his first goal in a 5–1 friendly victory over Paraguay, and a few days later scored his second goal in another 5–1 friendly victory over Nigeria. He was part of the Dutch squad for the 1998 FIFA World Cup in France, as back-up to established international strikers Patrick Kluivert, Dennis Bergkamp and Pierre van Hooijdonk and wingers Boudewijn Zenden and Marc Overmars. With other strikers not fully fit, Hasselbaink started the opening game against Belgium at the Stade de France, but missed a scoring opportunity in the 0–0 draw and was taken off for Bergkamp after 65 minutes. Kluivert was sent off in the match but Bergkamp was played as the only striker in the next game against South Korea, and van Hooijdonk was taken off the bench to replace him. In the third group game against Mexico at the Stade Geoffroy-Guichard Hasselbaink came on for Bergkamp after 78 minutes, which was to be his last appearance at the tournament as Kluivert returned from suspension to leave Hasselbaink as Hiddink's fourth choice forward; Netherlands ended the tournament in fourth place.
Hiddink resigned and was replaced by his assistant Frank Rijkaard, who rarely picked Hasselbaink at international level. He next played on 18 August 1999, alongside Kluivert and Ruud van Nistelrooy in a friendly against Denmark; he was taken off for Clarence Seedorf and the game ended 0–0. He next appeared six months later, playing ten minutes against Germany and 70 minutes against Scotland, and despite van Nistelrooy being injured Hasselbaink was not selected for UEFA Euro 2000 as the five forwards chosen were Bergkamp, Kluivert, van Hooijdonk, Roy Makaay and Peter van Vossen. He had been part of the 25 man initial squad but, along with André Ooijer and Winston Bogarde, was not chosen for the final 22.
Louis van Gaal rated Hasselbaink more highly than Rijkaard, meaning more chances at international level when van Gaal took over as manager in July 2000. Hasselbaink scored against Spain in a 2–1 win at the Estadio de La Cartuja on 15 November 2000 but both he and Spanish captain Fernando Hierro were sent off for fighting late in the game. On 24 March 2001, he scored in a 5–0 win over Andorra at the Mini Estadi, and four days later converted a penalty in a draw with Portugal at the Estádio das Antas. On 25 April he scored in his third successive World Cup qualifying game, in a 4–0 win over Cyprus at the Philips Stadion. He later played against Estonia (twice), England, the Republic of Ireland and Denmark; he scored a penalty past Denmark in a 1–1 draw at Telia Parken. Netherlands did not qualify for the 2002 FIFA World Cup as they finished four points behind Portugal and Ireland.
Dick Advocaat replaced van Gaal as national team manager in January 2002, and Hasselbaink remained in contention. On 21 August, he came on as a substitute in a 1–0 win over Norway at the Ullevaal Stadion, and on 7 September he scored in a 3–0 victory over Belarus, the opening qualifying game for UEFA Euro 2004; this was his last appearance for Netherlands.
Hasselbaink was a quick sprinter and had a powerful shot, able to shoot with his left-foot despite being primarily right-footed. Tom Sheen, sports reporter for The Independent and Chelsea supporter, wrote that "[Hasselbaink] possessed one of the best strikes ever seen at Stamford Bridge, was an expert free-kick taker, great with both feet and decent in the air".
In October 2009, Hasselbaink trained with Conference South side Woking to help keep himself fit and do some coaching. He then worked with Chelsea's under-16 squad and coached at the Nike Academy while taking his UEFA 'B' and 'A' licences. From July 2011 to January 2013 he was a member of the coaching staff at Nottingham Forest, leaving the club when manager Sean O'Driscoll was sacked.
In May 2013, Hasselbaink was announced as the new manager of newly relegated Belgian Second Division club Royal Antwerp. He stated that the club was "a two or three year project" and he aimed to win promotion by playing attacking football with younger players on a reduced budget. He made a number of signings for the club, including former England under-19 international John Bostock. He led the club to a seventh-place finish in the 2013–14 season, before turning down a new deal at the club in May 2014.
On 13 November 2014, Hasselbaink was appointed manager at League Two side Burton Albion. He signed a two-and-half-year contract, and stated that he was attracted to Burton by the club's stability. Four days after his appointment he took charge of his first game at Burton, a 3–1 win at Wycombe Wanderers which moved the club into fourth in the table. He was nominated for the League Two Manager of the Month award in January for going unbeaten in the month and leading the club to victories over promotion rivals Shrewsbury Town and Bury; however Chris Wilder of Northampton Town won the award. On 18 April, Burton won 2–1 away at Morecambe to earn promotion to League One for the first time in their history. Two weeks later, Burton came from 2–1 down, with ten men following the dismissal of goalkeeper Jon McLaughlin, to defeat Cambridge United 3–2 at the Abbey Stadium and win the League Two title. At the time of his departure Burton were top of League One.
On 4 December 2015, Hasselbaink was appointed as manager of Championship club Queens Park Rangers; he signed on a rolling contract, alongside his assistant David Oldfield. Eight days later, he took charge of them for the first time, in a goalless draw against Burnley at Loftus Road. After the game he commented that his team were low on confidence, and needed to be given room to express themselves and "play with freedom". Despite the sale of leading scorer Charlie Austin earlier the same day, Hasselbaink earned his first win in charge of the "Hoops" on 16 January 2016, a 3–0 victory at Rotherham United. He guided them to a 12th-place finish, and spoke of his expectations of a busy summer in the transfer market.
Hasselbaink is one of disproportionately few black football managers in England. After being hired by QPR, he was asked by Talksport if he felt that he had added responsibilities as a black manager, to which he answered:
Shortly afterwards, Port Vale chairman Norman Smurthwaite revealed that he had rejected Hasselbaink for the vacant managerial position at his club in 2014, out of fear that racist elements of their support would abuse him.
Hasselbaink has four daughters. He is the younger brother of Carlos Hasselbaink, and uncle of Nigel Hasselbaink, both professional footballers.
As of match played 7 May 2016.
Boavista
Taça de Portugal winner: 1996–97
Atlético Madrid
Copa del Rey runner-up: 1999–2000
Chelsea
FA Charity Shield winner: 2000
FA Cup runner-up: 2001–02
Premier League runner-up: 2003–04
Middlesbrough
UEFA Cup runner-up: 2005–06
Cardiff City
FA Cup runner-up: 2007–08
Individual
Premier League Golden Boot winner: 1998–99 (shared), 2000–01
Burton Albion
Football League Two champion: 2014–15
