The Martinique national football team (French: Équipe de la Martinique de football) represents the French overseas department and region of Martinique in international football. The team is controlled by the Ligue de Football de la Martinique (English: Martinique Football League), a local branch of French Football Federation (French: Fédération Française de Football). On 7 August 2010, the national team adopted the nickname Les Matinino, which pays tribute to the history of the island.
Caribbean Cup:
Winners (1): 1993
Coupe de l'Outre-Mer:
Winners (1): 2010
CFU Championship:
Winners (2): 1983, 1985
As an overseas department of the French Republic, Martinique is not a member of FIFA and is therefore not eligible to enter the FIFA World Cup or any competition organized first-hand by the organization. Martiniquais, being French citizens, are eligible to play for the France national football team. Martinique is, however, a member of CONCACAF and CFU and is eligible for all competitions organized by both organizations. Indeed, according to the status of the FFF (article 34, paragraph 6): "[...]Under the control of related continental confederations, and with the agreement of the FFF, those leagues can organize international sport events at a regional level or set up teams in order to participate to them."'
Martinique's highest honor to date was winning the Caribbean Cup in 1993. Martinique also was a two-time winner of the CFU Championship, a precursor to the Caribbean Cup. A more recent success was winning the 2010 Coupe de l'Outre-Mer. The team defeated Réunion 5–3 on penalties to claim the title. The national team has participated in three CONCACAF Gold Cups and its best finish in the competition was in 2002 when the team reached the quarterfinals where they lost to Canada 6–5 on penalties.
The following players were called up for the 2014 Caribbean Cup. Caps and goals updated as of November 1, 2014.
2010 Coupe de l'Outre-Mer
2010 Caribbean Cup
Last updated: 3 December 2010
Martinique has participated in four of the twelve CONCACAF Gold Cups contested. The team's first appearance in the competition was in 1993. The team was eliminated in the first round, however, not without procuring its first point in the competition after earning a 2–2 draw against Canada. Martinique's next appearance in the competition came in 2002. The team achieved its best performance reaching the quarterfinals where they lost to Canada 6–5 on penalties. The following year, Martinique appeared in the competition again, however, the team departed the tournament without scoring a goal.
Martinique have appeared in 12 Caribbean Cups. The national team is one of four teams to have won the competition. Martinique won their first and only Caribbean Cup title in 1993. The tournament was played in Jamaica and Martinique defeated the hosts 6–5 on penalties in the final match. The following year, Martinique finished runner-up to Trinidad and Tobago. The team has finished in third place on three occasions in 1992, 1996, and 2001.
Martinique has participated all three editions of the Coupe de l'Outre-Mer, which was established in 2008. In the first edition, the team finished runner-up to the champions Réunion losing 1–0 in the final. In 2010, Martinique won its first Coupe de l'Outre-Mer defeating the defending champions Réunion 5–3 on penalties at the Stade Dominique Duvauchelle in Créteil. They re-lost the title to Reunion in 2012 in a penalty shootout.
From 1978–1985, Martinique participated in the CFU Championship, a precursor to the Caribbean Cup. Of the six championships played, Martinique featured three final rounds. Les Matinino won the competition twice in 1983 and 1985.
*Draws include knockout matches decided by penalty shootout.
**Gold background colour indicates that the tournament was won. Red border colour indicates tournament was held on home soil.
