The 1908 Summer Olympics (also known as the Games of the IV Olympiad) was an international multi-sport event held from 27 April to 31 October 1908, in London, United Kingdom, coinciding with the Franco-British Exhibition. A total of 2,008 athletes representing 22 nations participated in 110 events in 18 sports. Diving, field hockey, and figure skating were contested for the first time at these Games. Argentina, Switzerland and Turkey were the only nations that did not earn any medals.
The host nation, the United Kingdom, dominated the medal table, collecting the most gold (56), silver (51), and bronze (39) medals. The 146 medals won at these Games—a major increase from the two medals won at the 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis—are still the highest number won by a British delegation at any modern Olympics. Particular success was achieved by the British team in the boxing events, where out of a possible fifteen medals across the five weight classes, they won all but the middleweight silver medal, which was taken by Reginald Baker competing for Australasia.
Australasia was the name given to the combined team of athletes from Australia (making its fourth Olympic appearance) and New Zealand (competing for the first time). The host team included a number of athletes from Ireland, at the time part of the United Kingdom. In contrast, Finland, which was integrated in the Russian Empire, competed in London as a separate country.
This is the full table of the medal count of the 1908 Summer Olympics, based on the medal count of the International Olympic Committee (IOC). These rankings sort by the number of gold medals earned by a country. The number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. If, after the above, countries are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically. This information is provided by the IOC; however the IOC does not recognize or endorse any ranking system.
To sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on the  icon next to the column title.
      Host nation (Great Britain)
Notes
References