Luis García Postigo (born June 1, 1969 in Mexico City, Mexico) is a former international Mexican footballer, primarily as a striker; he also played as a winger.
Today he is a football commentator for TV Azteca and narrates alongside Argentine Mexican commentator Christian Martinoli.
García came out of the Pumas' youth groups as a great prospect. He debuted when he was 17 years old in 1987 with the Pumas team. He also played with Atlético Madrid, and Real Sociedad of Spain's Liga de Fútbol Profesional. Returning from Europe he continued his career in Club América, Atlante, Guadalajara, Morelia, and Puebla. He scored a total of 156 goals in the México Primera División, and led it in scoring three times. He retired from association football in 2001. He last played with Puebla F.C.. He became top-scorer in the 1990–91, 1991–92, and the 1997 winter tournaments.
Atlético Madrid
Luis Garcia arrived at Atletico Madrid in 1992, scoring 17 goals in his debut season with the Spanish Club. After struggling in his second season, he was loaned out to Real Sociedad.
For the Mexico national team, he compiled 78 caps, scoring 29 goals and played in the 1994 World Cup, scoring both Mexican goals in their first round victory versus the Republic of Ireland. He was the tournament top scorer with 3 goals in the 1995 King Fahd Cup (later renamed the Confederations Cup). He was selected to be part for the Mexican team for the 1998 FIFA World Cup, however he did not see action in the tournament.
After retiring, he picked up a commentator spot with TV Azteca. He left the job when he was offered the position of Vice-President of Monarcas Morelia. After leaving Morelia, He currently has returned to TV Azteca to his old job of a commentator in TV Azteca Sport Programs.
In 2011, García appear in film production Guerrero 12, a feature-length documentary examining soccer fandom passion. The film is directed by Miguel A. Reina, who was also responsible for the Sundance film Un aliado en el tiempo.
Garcia is also a Spanish color commentator for the North American version of Pro Evolution Soccer alongside TV Azteca commentator Cristian Martinoli.
