The 2011 Tri Nations Series was the sixteenth annual Tri Nations rugby union series between the national rugby union teams of New Zealand, Australia and South Africa, respectively nicknamed the All Blacks, Wallabies and Springboks. It was also the last series in which only three teams participated, and the last under the Tri Nations name. In 2012, Argentina's Pumas joined this competition, which was rebranded as The Rugby Championship.
The 2011 Rugby World Cup was held in New Zealand between 9 September and 23 October 2011. As a result, the 2011 Tri Nations was shortened to include only six games instead of the usual nine. Each team played the other two countries twice rather than three times. Australia won the series for the first time in ten years.
All times are local
Touch judges:
Keith Brown (New Zealand)
Vinny Munro (New Zealand)Television match official:
Matt Goddard (Australia)
Touch judges:Stuart Dickinson (Australia)James Leckie (Australia)Television match official:
Garratt Williamson (New Zealand)
Dan Carter reclaimed the career lead in Test points from Jonny Wilkinson of England with his first penalty, ending the evening with 1,204 career points.
Touch judges:Marius Jonker (South Africa)Christie du Preez (South Africa)Television match official:Glen Jackson (New Zealand)
Touch judges:George Clancy (Ireland)
Carlo Damasco (Italy)Television match official:
Shaun Veldsman (South Africa)
South Africa's starting XV had a total of 810 caps going into the match, an all-time record for the sport.
Touch judges:
Andrew Small (England)
Carlo Damasco (Italy)Television match official:
Johann Meuwesen (South Africa)
This was the first time that a Tri Nations test was played in Port Elizabeth.
Source: Fox Sports AllBlacks.com
Touch judges:Craig Joubert (South Africa)Cobus Wessels (South Africa)Television match official:
Matt Goddard (Australia)
History of rugby union matches between Australia and South Africa
History of rugby union matches between Australia and New Zealand
History of rugby union matches between New Zealand and South Africa
