Kateryna Volodymyrivna Bondarenko (Ukrainian: Катерина Володимирівна Бондаренко, born 8 August 1986) is a professional female tennis player from Ukraine and a doubles champion at Australian Open 2008.
The younger sister of professional tennis players Valeria and Alona Bondarenko, she was born in Kryvyi Rih, Ukraine, then part of the Soviet Union. She was introduced to tennis by her parents at age 4. She plays right-handed and turned pro in 2000. Her career-high rankings in singles and doubles are World No. 29 and World No. 9, respectively.
Over her career, Kateryna Bondarenko has defeated players ranked in the Top 10 such as: Anna Chakvetadze, Dominika Cibulková, Elena Dementieva, Sara Errani, Ana Ivanovic, Angelique Kerber, Svetlana Kuznetsova, Petra Kvitová, Ekaterina Makarova, Carla Suárez Navarro, Flavia Pennetta, Nadia Petrova, Agnieszka Radwańska, Lucie Šafářová, Dinara Safina, Samantha Stosur, and Venus Williams.
Bondarenko is coached by her father, Volodymyr and mother, Natalia.
On 24 January 2008, paired with her sister Alona, she won the doubles tournament at the Australian Open without seeding, defeating in the final the number 12-seeded pair Victoria Azarenka/Shahar Pe'er in three sets. At the Paris Gaz de France tournament, she reached the singles quarterfinals beating defending champion Nadia Petrova and fellow Ukrainian Yuliana Fedak before falling to Elena Dementieva. In doubles, she partnered with her sister Alona again and won their back-to-back tour title. Bondarenko played the Proximus Diamond Games in Antwerp the week after defeating countrywoman Tatiana Perebiynis in the first round. She then went out in the second round after a close match against young Russian Alisa Kleybanova in three sets after suffering a left hip strain. This injury also contributed to the loss in the doubles semifinal 1–6, 1–6 together with her sister and prevented her from playing in Doha. At the 2008 DFS Classic in Birmingham in June she won her first and only WTA singles title after defeating Yanina Wickmayer in final that lasted almost three hours. Bondarenko represented Ukraine at the Beijing Olympics, falling to Dementieva in straight sets. In doubles, she and Alona reached fourth place after they lost in the third place decider.
Bondarenko started her 2009 year by playing at the Brisbane International in Brisbane, Australia. She lost in the first round to eventual champion Victoria Azarenka. Next, she played at the 2009 Moorilla Hobart International in Hobart, Australia. She lost in the first round to Magdaléna Rybáriková in three sets. At the Australian Open, Bondarenko upset 9th seed Agnieszka Radwańska in the first round, beat Lourdes Domínguez Lino in the second round but lost in the third round to 22nd seed Jie Zheng i two sets. After the Australian Open, she played Fed Cup for Ukraine as Ukraine faced Israel. Bondarenko lost her first rubber to Shahar Pe'er in three sets but won her final rubber against Tzipi Obziler, also in three sets. Ukraine beat Israel 3-2. At the Dubai Tennis Championships, Kateryna lost in the first round to Virginie Razzano 7-5, 6-2. At the BNP Paribas Open, she lost in the first round to Shahar Pe'er 6-2, 6-1. At the Miami Open, Bondarenko lost in the first round to Maria Kirilenko 6-4, 0-6, 6-4. After Miami, Bondarenko played at the MPS Group Championships in Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida. In the first round, Bondarenko beat Barbora Strýcová in straight sets. In the second round, she lost to her sister Alona Bondarenko in a three-set match. At the Italian Open, Kateryna beat Italian Roberta Vinci in the first round. In the second round, she beat Alizé Cornet. In the third round, she retired against Jelena Janković.
Kateryna participated in her first tournament of the year Hobart passing the first round of Lucie Šafářová with 6–2, 6–7 losing in the second round to Sara Errani with a score of 6–7, 4–6. The grand slam Australian Open where was your favorite 30, past the first round by Ioana Raluca Olaru with a score of 7–6 losing 6–4 in the second round Elena Baltacha with the choir of 2–6, and 5–7 in doubles with her sister Alona Bondarenko lost the first round the pair Flavia Pennetta/Gisela Dulko with the score 4–6, 6–2, 3–6. The tournament in Dubai Katerina managed to pass the first round of Magdaléna Rybáriková with the score 6–3, 6–1, in the second round was forced to retire before of Victoria Azarenka the score 1–4. The tournament in Indian Wells could not participate equally and to Miami. The tournament in Warsaw Open has been eliminated since the first round of Alexandra Dulgheru with the score 3–6, 1–6, losing in doubles category with his score Alona pairs in front Su-Wei Hsieh/Zheng Jie with the score 5–7, 7–5, 10–8. The Grand Slam French Open, rated as the favorite last 32 first round by Julie Coin with the score 6–1, 6–2. Lost in second round at Canadian athlete Aleksandra Wozniak with the score 4–6, 1–6. In doubles Kateryna and Alona lost in the quarterfinals to favorites 12 Květa Peschke / Katarina Srebotnik with the score 4–6, 6–2, 6–3.
Bondarenko began her 2011 campaign at the 2011 ASB Classic in Auckland. Ranked No. 99, she advanced to the quarterfinals before losing to Julia Görges. She then failed to qualify at the 2011 Moorilla Hobart International, but made the doubles final with Līga Dekmeijere, losing to Italian duo Sara Errani and Roberta Vinci. At the 2011 Australian Open, Bondarenko faced Peng Shuai in the first round and lost 2–6, 6–3, 8–6. She then participated in Fed Cup where she won both singles matches against Sweden's Johanna Larsson and Sofia Arvidsson. Kateryna then failed to qualify in Dubai and Doha. She then lost to Magdaléna Rybáriková in the second round of an ITF event in The Bahamas. Her poor form continued, as she failed to qualify in Miami and Rome. Bondarenko lost in the final round of qualifying to local girl Stéphanie Foretz Gacon at the 2011 Internationaux de Strasbourg. She lost in the first round of the 2011 French Open to Rebecca Marino.
Kateryna opened her grass court season at the 2011 UNICEF Open, but lost to World No. 97 Vesna Dolonts in the first round. Her fortunes began to change at Wimbledon, where she advanced to the third round for the first time in her career. Bondarenko defeated Alizé Cornet and Sara Errani before losing to former World No. 3 Nadia Petrova. She then made the quarterfinals in Budapest, losing there to Klára Zakopalová. Her best showing of the year came in Bad Gastein at the 2011 Gastein Ladies, where she made the semifinals. Bondarenko advanced to the semis defeating Nuria Llagostera Vives, Johanna Larsson, and Carla Suárez Navarro before losing to Spaniard María José Martínez Sánchez.
After losing in the quarterfinals of the inaugural 2011 Baku Cup, she missed out on qualifying in Toronto and Cincinnati, losing to Galina Voskoboeva and Petra Cetkovská, respectively. After winning two matches to qualify for the 2011 Texas Tennis Open, she cruised into the quarterfinals where she was soundly beaten by in-form German Sabine Lisicki. At the US Open, Bondarenko won her first round against Lucie Hradecká. She lost in the second round to 2nd seed and 2010 finalist Vera Zvonareva in a tough three sets.
Bondarenko started off her 2012 season by playing doubles in the Hobart International. She lost in the 1st round. She next participated in the 2012 Australian Open where she was beaten by American Vania King in the first round.
She lost in the first round in the 2012 French Open to qualifier Chan Yung-jan. She was eliminated in the second round of the 2012 Wimbledon Championships by Ana Ivanovic, against whom she had never previously lost. Bondarenko lost in the first round at the London Olympics to Petra Kvitová in three tight sets. She retired from professional tennis after 1st round lost at the 2012 US Open, where she was beaten by former No.1 Jelena Janković
Bondarenko made her return in the qualifying for the Katowice Open, where she lost to Slovakia's Kristína Kučová in two sets.
At the French Open she lost in the first round of qualifying to Indy de Vroome. She made a quarterfinal at the 10k ITF event in Budapest, Hungary and also at the 25k event in Kristinehamn, where she won the doubles partnering Cornelia Lister from Sweden. She lost to Kateřina Siniaková in three sets in the first round of qualifying for Bad Gastein, and in the second round of qualifying against Yulia Putintseva at Båstad after beating Stephanie Vogt in two sets.
Bondarenko managed to qualify for Baku by beating Jovana Jakšić in straight sets but she lost in the first round to Julia Glushko in three sets. She received a wildcard into the first round of Tashkent where she fell to the top seed and defending champion Bojana Jovanovski in a tight three set match. She won a 25k event in Monterrey by beating Ana Vrljić 6-1 7-5. A few weeks later she won a 50k event in Macon by beating Grace Min in the final in two sets. Her last tournament of the year was 50k event in Captiva Island, where she was beaten by Julia Glushko in three sets.
At Australian Open she lost in the second round of qualifying to Laura Siegemund 6-4 6-4. Bondarenko qualified for her first Premier-level tournament after comeback at Antwerp, where she beaten Tímea Babos, Paula Badosa Gibert and Dinah Pfizenmaier. She was beaten in the 1st round by Dominika Cibulková. She lost in the second round of qualifying at Acapulco to Richèl Hogenkamp 6-3 6-3 In Cincinnati she lost to world number 26.Eugenie Bouchard in straight sets. At the US Open she won four matches in straight sets, going from qualifying to round 2, where she lost in straight sets with a fight (3-6 4-6) to world no.2 Simona Halep. This performance made her re-enter Top 90.
Bondarenko started her 2016 year at the 2016 Brisbane International. She was the 4th seed for qualifying, and she successfully qualified for the main draw by beating Maria Sakkari, Kaia Kanepi and Naomi Osaka. In the first round, she lost to Madison Brengle in three sets. After Brisbane, Bondarenko was the fourth seed for qualifying at the 2016 Hobart International. In the first round of qualifying, she lost to Pauline Parmentier. At the Australian Open, Bondarenko beat Australian Ajla Tomljanović in the first round in two sets. In the second round, she earned her first win over 23rd seed Svetlana Kuznetsova to reach the third round for the first time since 2009 but lost in the third round in a three-set match to 12th-seeded Belinda Bencic. At the BNP Paribas Open, Bondarenko was the 3rd seed for qualifying and successfully qualified for the main draw after beating Paula Kania and Lourdes Domínguez Lino. She defeated Alison Van Uytvanck in 3 sets in the 1st round, and rallied to beat 24th seed Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova in 3 sets in the 2nd round. She then beat compatriot Lesia Tsurenko in 3 sets, after being a set down. She will face the world No.1 and 1st seed Serena Williams in the 4th round.
