Ryan Henk Donk (born 30 March 1986 in Amsterdam) is a Dutch professional footballer who plays as a defensive midfielder for Turkish club Galatasaray. He can also play as a centre back.
Ryan Donk impressed in the 2005–06 season at RKC Waalwijk, and with an expiring contract, he wanted to make a step up to a higher level. AZ first approached him, but other clubs including Ajax, PSV and Barcelona showed serious interest in him. Donk chose to go to AZ as a replacement for defender Joris Mathijsen who had been sold to German club Hamburger, thinking it to be the best for his development. Initially AZ intended to loan Donk to RKC Waalwijk, but the player stated his intent to stay at the club in an attempt to push into the first team. He earned himself a place in the starting line-up and impressed with his performances at AZ.
On 31 August 2008, Donk signed for West Bromwich Albion for one year on loan. He made his debut in a 1–0 win away at Middlesbrough on 28 September 2008.
On 26 June 2009, Donk moved from AZ in his home country of the Netherlands, to Belgium to play for Club Brugge.
At the start of the 2013-14 season, Donk transferred to Turkish side Kasımpaşa for an undisclosed fee. He played as a central defender for the team in his first two years, however during the first half of the 2015-16 season before transferring to Galatasaray, he played mainly as defensive midfielder.
On 5 January 2016, Galatasaray announced dealing with Donk. On 9 January 2016, Donk made his debut for Galatasaray and scored his first goal in penalty box against Karşıyaka in the 2015–16 Turkish Cup. He also made a assist for his teammate Bilal Kısa in same match.
A tall and commanding defender, Donk has drawn comparisons to many former footballers - one being former Dutch defender Jaap Stam.
In 2007 Donk was called up by Jong Oranje coach Foppe de Haan to be part of his squad for the 2007 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship held in the Netherlands. Donk participated in both of their first round group matches against Israel (1–0 win) and Portugal (2–1 win) to secure a semi final spot and to qualify for the 2008 Summer Olympics. During the tournament his sister was involved in a car accident. Donk left the Dutch squad for a day and returned into the tournament after it was known her health was improving. After the Dutch qualified for the semi final and Olympics Donk took off his football jersey to reveal another shirt having the text "Dit toernooi is voor jou, ik hou van je." (This tournament is dedicated to you, I love you.) on it to support his sister. In the semi finals against England (1–1, 13–12 after 32 penalty kicks) Donk assisted Maceo Rigters to score his 90th minute equaliser with a bicycle kick which took the game into extra time. Donk was the only Dutch player on the field at the end of the game not to shoot a penalty after one England player (Nedum Onuoha) was unable to shoot due to an injury while England had no substitutes left. The Dutch went on to retain their 2006 title by beating Serbia 4–1 in the final. After his display at the tournament, Donk made the pre-selection of the Dutch national team on 6 August.
As of 2 March 2016.
