The Campeonato Baiano is the football league of the state of Bahia, Brazil. The championship has been played since 1905 without interruption.
First stage:
12 teams are divided into two groups. the teams of each group play once only against the teams in the other group. the eight best teams, regardless of group, qualify to the Quarterfinals. the other four teams go to the relegation playoffs.
Relegation playoffs:
The worst 4 teams of the first play in a Two-legged Knockout tie, with the loser of each being relegated to the Second level in the next year.
Final stage
The 8 best teams play in a Two-legged Knockout tie, with the winner of each one qualifying for the Semifinals, and the same process repeats in the Semifinals, and the Finals are played in the same way than the semifinals.The winners of the finals are the champions. In case that two teams end tied after a round, those with the best record qualify. The top two teams qualify for the Copa do Nordeste and the Copa do Brasil of the next year. The third-placed team has the choice of participate either in the Copa do Nordeste of the following year or in the Série D of the same year. the fourth-placed team inherits the 3rd placed team's berth in the tournament that the 3rd declined to participate.
First Division 2016
Esporte Clube Bahia
Associação Desportiva Bahia de Feira
Colo-Colo de Ilhéus Futebol e Regatas
Feirense Esporte Clube
Clube Esportivo Flamengo
Fluminense de Feira Futebol Clube
Galícia Esporte Clube
Jacobina Esporte Clube
Esporte Clube Jacuipense
Sociedade Desportiva Juazeirense
Esporte Clube Vitória
Esporte Clube Primeiro Passo de Vitória da Conquista
Second Division 2016
Catuense Futebol S/A
Serrano Sport Club
Botafogo Sport Club
Grapiúna Atlético Clube
Juazeiro Social Clube
Itabuna Esporte Clube
Esporte Clube Ypiranga
Not enter in Second Division 2016
Alagoinhas Atlético Clube
Associação Desportiva Jequié
Associação Desportiva Leônico
Esporte Clube Ipitanga da Bahia Ltda
Associação Desportiva Comunitária Astro
Camaçari Futebol Clube
Sport Clube Camaçariense
Conquista Futebol Clube
Guanambi Atlético Clube
Barreiras Esporte Clube
Cruzeiro Futebol Clube
Esporte Clube Poções
Real Salvador Esporte Clube Ltda.
Serrinha Esporte Clube
