The 2012–13 Czech First League, known as the Gambrinus liga for sponsorship reasons, was the 20th season of the Czech Republic's top-tier football league. The defending champions were Liberec, who won their third Czech First League title the previous season.
A number of games were postponed due to adverse weather conditions. On 18 March the game between Jihlava and Mladá Boleslav was postponed due to heavy snow. A second game was postponed, before, on 10 May 2013, the match between Dukla Prague and Brno became the third match to be postponed, this time due to a waterlogged pitch.
Viktoria Žižkov and Bohemians 1905 were relegated to the 2012–13 Czech 2. Liga after finishing last and second to last, respectively, in the 2011–12 season. Žižkov therefore immediately returned to the second tier, while Bohemians left after a three-year spell in the top flight.
The relegated teams were replaced by 2011–12 2. Liga runners-up Jihlava and fourth placed Zbrojovka Brno, who were promoted in place of 2. Liga winners FK Ústí nad Labem, whose stadium did not satisfy league requirements. Brno thus returned to the top flight after a one-year absence. Jihlava, having last played in the top flight in the 2005–06 season, returned after a six-season absence.
Note: Flags indicate national team as has been defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.
1 According to current revision of List of Czech Football League managers
Source: Gambrinus liga (Czech)
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head goals scored; 5) goal difference; 6) number of goals scored1By winning the 2012–13 Czech Cup.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Head-to-Head: used when head-to-head record is used to rank tied teams.
Source: Gambrinus liga (Czech)
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
For coming matches, an a indicates there is an article about the match.
2012–13 Czech Cup
2012–13 Czech 2. Liga
