Manuel Henrique Tavares Fernandes (Portuguese pronunciation: [mɐnuˈɛɫ fɨɾˈnɐ̃dɨʃ]; born 5 February 1986) is a Portuguese professional footballer who plays for Russian club FC Lokomotiv Moscow as a midfielder.
He started his professional career with Benfica at only 18, then went on to compete in England in Spain, mainly at the service of Everton and Valencia. He signed with Beşiktaş in January 2011, spending the following three and a half seasons with the club.
Fernandes represented the Portuguese under-21 team in two European Championships. He made his debut with the full side in 2005.
Born in Lisbon, Fernandes grew up in the capital suburb of Amadora, where he would regularly play street football with future Sporting Clube de Portugal and Manchester United star Nani as a child. Subsequently, he joined S.L. Benfica's youth system and made his first team debut during the 2003–04 season under coach José Antonio Camacho, making an immediate impression on both the manager and the club's supporters and becoming the Eagles' second youngest ever goalscorer in only his second game, a 2–1 win at Gil Vicente FC.
Fernandes became a regular first-team in the 2004–05 campaign, often partnering established Petit in central midfield, under the guidance of Italian coach Giovanni Trapattoni. He helped Benfica win the Primeira Liga title after an 11-year drought, missing just five league games and scoring in a 20 win at Vitória de Setúbal, on 19 March 2005. He also made seven appearances in the season's UEFA Cup, in an eventual round-of-32 elimination at the hands of eventual winners PFC CSKA Moscow.
During the 2005–06 pre-season, Fernandes underwent surgery in Munich due to an inguinal hernia. He was treated by specialist Ulrike Muschaweck. In the season's UEFA Champions League, he scored the equalising goal in a draw at Villarreal CF in the group stage, with Benfica again only being ousted by the eventual champions, in this case FC Barcelona in the quarterfinals.
In the 2006 summer, Fernandes signed for Portsmouth of the Premier League on loan, with a deal agreed for a permanent transfer of approximately £7 million if he fully recovered from his groin injury. A transfer was first proposed in late July, but could not be concluded as the player was still suffering from the injury, failing his medical at the club twice; in an unusual move, Benfica allowed the player to be treated at Portsmouth in the hope that he would regain fitness before the 1 September transfer deadline, and, after five weeks at the club, it was projected that he still needed two months recovery and so, the initial loan deal with a future fee was agreed.
Fernandes made his Portsmouth debut in the Football League Cup away to Mansfield Town, scoring from outside the area after just five minutes in a 2–1 win. He went on to make sporadic appearances for the club throughout the first half of the season, with Sean Davis and countryman Pedro Mendes the preferred midfield pairing; it was later revealed by Pompey manager Harry Redknapp that if he were to make three consecutive appearances, it would trigger a clause in which Portsmouth were obligated to sign the player for £12m – because of the high transfer fee, Portsmouth revealed in December that unless Benfica were to compromise on the fee they would not make the deal permanent, and the player returned to his previous club in the winter transfer window.
In January 2007 Fernandes returned to England, joining Everton on loan until the end of the season. He also signed a long-term contract with Benfica in January 2007, the deal being complicated due to the fact he was part-owned by a third party agency, but he eventually made an assured debut for his new club in the 1–0 win over Blackburn Rovers on 10 February, and quickly became something of a fans' favourite at Goodison Park; he scored his first league goal for the club on 24 February against Watford and, on 28 April, added another, against league leaders Manchester United – the goal, although spectacular, was not enough as the opposition would go on to score four times in the final half-hour of the game, winning 4–2.
With Everton manager David Moyes reluctant to pay Benfica's reported £12 million asking price, Fernandes returned to Benfica in the summer, where he had several good performances during the pre-season. On 8 August 2007 it was reported that the Toffees had made an offer of £6 million for the player and, five days later, it was confirmed by both clubs that he was the subject of an acceptable bid from the English side, believed to be £6 million for Benfica's 50% share in the player, with Everton having to negotiate with Global Sports Agency for the other half his playing rights; later reports indicated Everton were willing to pay £12 million for 100% of the rights.
On 14 August, it was reported that Fernandes had flown to the Merseyside to complete the deal after being left out of the squad in Benfica's game, and he attended Everton's match against Blackburn on 25 August. Adding to the fact the player's rights were partly owned by an agency, the Premier League did not agree to the transfer as Everton would only half-own the player's contract – the English were not too happy about this as the league had previously let Carlos Tevez and Javier Mascherano move to other clubs under the same agreements.
However, in a late twist on 26 August, Fernandes opted to sign a six-year contract with La Liga side Valencia CF, in a deal worth €18 million (£12.2 million) to Benfica and the third parties owner. The deal included a €60 million buy-out clause.
Fernandes made his debut as a substitute during a 2–1 away win against UD Almería on 2 September 2007, and ended his first season with seven league appearances, five in the starting XI. In January 2008 he was loaned back to Everton until the end of the season, with the club having the option to sign him permanently; during his five-month spell he went scoreless in 13 official appearances, 12 of those in the league.
Back at Valencia for the 2008–09 season, new Valencia coach Unai Emery declared Fernandes as part of his plans: he came from the bench in the first league match, a 3–0 home win against RCD Mallorca. On 5 October 2008 he scored the only goal in a win at Real Valladolid, his first with the club; overall, during his first full campaign, he complemented well with veterans David Albelda and Rubén Baraja, amassing league totals of 27 games and 1,718 minutes, but also sustained a fibula injury against Getafe CF in April 2009 which curtailed his season, even though he played the entire match.
In January 2010, Fernandes was expected to sign on loan with Inter Milan due to lack of opportunities at Valencia, with the Nerazzurri having the right to buy off his contract at the end of the season. However, he failed his medical exams on the 30th, cancelling the deal; he was also linked with a return to Portsmouth in the same transfer window, but that move fell through after paperwork failed to clear in time.
In late December 2010, completely out of favour with manager Emery, Fernandes was loaned to Beşiktaş J.K. in the Süper Lig until the end of the season, being officially presented on 3 January 2011. At the Istanbul club, he reunited with former Benfica teammate Simão Sabrosa.
On 11 May 2011, Fernandes assisted on both team goals and converted his penalty in the shootout as Beşiktaş won the Turkish Cup against İstanbul Büyükşehir Belediyespor (4–3, 2–2 after extra time). He appeared in a total of 20 official games during his first spell in Istanbul (14 league, six cup) and, in early July 2011, a permanent three-year contract was arranged, for a €2 million transfer fee.
On 2 June 2014, free agent Fernandes signed a long-term contract with Russian club FC Lokomotiv Moscow. Sporting director Kirill Kotov referred to the player's "perfect technique and high playing intellect" as being the main reasons for his acquisition in order "to boost creativity in midfield". Due to his performances, he was named his team's Player of the Month in October 2014.
In June 2007 Fernandes played in all games at the 2007 UEFA European Under-21 Championship, scoring the opening goal for Portugal in their 4–0 win over Israel – the national side eventually failed Olympic qualification. He also appeared at the 2006 edition's final stages and was an active member in the 2009 qualifying campaign.
Fernandes received his first call-up to the senior team in February 2005. He scored his first senior international goal on 26 March in a friendly match with Canada, and played his first non-friendly game against Armenia on 17 November 2007, a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifier.
Although not part of the list of 24 players initially selected for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Fernandes was one of the six players named in a backup list.
Fernandes' cousin, Gelson Fernandes, is also a footballer and a midfielder. Born in Cape Verde and playing most of his career at FC Sion – he also appeared for teams in England and France – he opted to represent Switzerland internationally. He is also cousin to two other footballers with Swiss nationality, Adilson Cabral and Edimilson Fernandes.
As of 30 January 2016
Benfica
Primeira Liga: 2004–05
Taça de Portugal: 2003–04
Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira: 2005
Valencia
Copa del Rey: 2007–08
Beşiktaş
Turkish Cup: 2010–11
Lokomotiv Moscow
Russian Cup: 2014–15
