In the 2002–03 season, the Serie A, the major football Italian professional league, was composed by 18 teams, for the 15th consecutive time from season 1988–89.
The first two teams qualified directly to UEFA Champions League, teams ending in the 3rd and 4th places had to play Champions League qualifications, teams ending in the 5th and 6th places qualified to UEFA Cup (another spot was given to the winner of Coppa Italia), while the last four teams were to be relegated in Serie B.
Juventus won its 27th national title, with Inter Milan placed second. Milan and Lazio were admitted to the Champions League preliminary phase, whereas Parma, Udinese and Roma (through the Coppa Italia finals) obtained a spot to the next UEFA Cup. Brescia and Perugia were admitted to participate in the UEFA Intertoto Cup, after Chievo declined to take part.
Piacenza, Torino, Como and Atalanta were relegated to Serie B, with the latter after having lost a relegation play-off against Reggina.
Unlike La Liga, which imposed a quota on the number of non-EU players on each club, Serie A clubs could sign as many non-EU players as available on domestic transfer. But for the 2003–04 season a quota was imposed on each of the clubs limiting the number of non-EU, non-EFTA and non-Swiss players who may be signed from abroad each season, following provisional measures introduced in the 2002–03 season, which allowed Serie A & B clubs to sign only one non-EU player in the 2002 summer transfer window.
Source: Lega Serie A
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1Roma qualified for the first round of the 2003-04 UEFA Cup as Coppa Italia runner-up because the winner, Milan, qualified for Champions League through championship position.2Perugia gained entry to the 2003 UEFA Intertoto Cup after Chievo renounced.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Source: lega-calcio.it (Italian)
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
For coming matches, an a indicates there is an article about the match.
Most wins - Juventus (21)
Fewest wins - Como and Torino (4)
Most draws - Brescia (15)
Fewest draws - Piacenza (6)
Most losses - Torino (21)
Fewest losses - Juventus and Lazio (4)
Most goals scored - Juventus and Inter (64)
Fewest goals scored - Torino (23)
Most goals conceded - Piacenza (62)
Fewest goals conceded - Juventus (29)
Atalanta B.C. relegated to Serie B.
Summer Transfer
Winter Transfer
co-ownership
co-ownership
Almanacco Illustrato del Calcio - La Storia 1898-2004, Panini Edizioni, Modena, September 2005
