Horia Tecău (Romanian pronunciation: [ˈhori.a teˈkəw]; born January 19, 1985) is a Romanian tennis player currently ranked World No. 10 in doubles. He turned pro in 2003 and reached the men's doubles finals of the 2010, 2011 and 2012 Wimbledon Championships with Robert Lindstedt before winning it in 2015 with Jean-Julien Rojer. Tecău also won the 2012 Australian Open mixed doubles title with Bethanie Mattek-Sands and the 2015 ATP World Tour Finals with Rojer.
On January 16, 2010, Tecău won his first ATP doubles title at the 2010 Heineken Open in Auckland, New Zealand, partnering Marcus Daniell.
Horia showed a solid game in the beginning of 2010 and won two doubles titles, (one Challenger and one ATP World Tour 250 Series), at Marrakech and Casablanca, which confirmed his good form.
He won his third doubles title at 's-Hertogenbosch and his second with partner Robert Lindstedt (his first with him came in Casablanca).
At the 2010 Wimbledon Championships, Tecău reached, for the first time in his career, a Grand Slam doubles final. He and his partner, Robert Lindstedt, defeated the pair of Tommy Robredo and Marcel Granollers in four sets in the quarter finals, qualifying for the semifinals where they defeated the duo of Juan Ignacio Chela and Eduardo Schwank. In the final Tecău and Lindstedt were defeated by the pair of Jürgen Melzer and Philipp Petzschner.
At Wimbledon in the mixed doubles, he and his partner, fellow Romanian Monica Niculescu, lost in the second round to Marcelo Melo and Rennae Stubbs.
At the 2010 Swedish Open, Lindstedt and Tecău won their third title together after winning in the final against Andreas Seppi and Simone Vagnozzi.
At the 2010 Farmers Classic, Tecău and Lindstedt were defeated by Eric Butorac and Jean-Julien Rojer in the quarterfinals.
At the 2010 Legg Mason Tennis Classic Tecău and Lindstedt were defeated by the pair of Marcos Baghdatis and Stanislas Wawrinka in the first round on the doubles category.
The fifth title of Tecău's career and fourth partnering Lindstedt came at the 2010 Pilot Pen Tennis. The final saw them beating Rohan Bopanna and Aisam-ul-Haq Qureshi, this being their second title win against the Indian-Pakistani pair.
In 2011 Horia started the year alongside his partner, Robert Lindstedt, at the Brisbane International. They had a good start and reached the final of the tournament but a calf injury of Lindstedt forced them to retire after just one set and thus losing the match to the Lukáš Dlouhý / Paul Hanley pair. At the Heineken Open Horia was the defending champion and seeded No. 1 with Robert but they were forced to withdrew due to the Swede's left calf injury sustained just days earlier.
At the Australian Open Horia and Robert were eleventh seed but despite leading 1–0 in the first round match against wildcards Colin Ebelthite and Adam Feeney they were forced to retire yet again due to Robert's injury.
After the year's first Grand Slam, Horia decided to give his partner, Robert, time to recover and paired with experienced doubles player, Belgian Dick Norman, for the PBZ Zagreb Indoors. This was a successful choice and they reached the tournament final and won it.
Following the Zagreb title, Horia paired for the next two tournaments with Austrian Julian Knowle and Pakistani Aisam-ul-Haq Qureshi but with little success, exiting both competitions after the first round. He then paired with fellow countryman Victor Hănescu for their biggest doubles title to date, the 500 point Abierto Mexicano Telcel. In the final they beat Brazilians Marcelo Melo and Bruno Soares in straight sets.
In April, Horia and Lindstedt defended their title in Casablanca, after an impressive display and losing just one set in the first round of the tournament.
He had a good grasscourt season with two finals together with Lindstedt, losing in the final of Wimbledon to the Bryan twins.
At the return to clay he defended his win at Swedish Open, again with Lindstedt.
Horia Tecău and Bethanie Mattek-Sands from US won the Australian Open mixed doubles final on 29 January. He reached the semifinals in men´s doubles with Robert Lindstedt and lost to Bob and Mike Bryan in a close 3-setter. Together they reached the final of a Masters even for the first time in Madrid. At the 2012 Summer Olympics, Tecău and teammate Adrian Ungur lost in the first round.
Horia Tecău and Robert Lindstedt separated in September 2012 after a fruitful three-year relationship.
Horia Tecău paired up with Max Mirnyi for 2013. They reached five finals and won three of them.
1 Held as Hamburg Masters (outdoor clay) until 2008, Madrid Masters (outdoor clay) 2009 – present.2 Held as Stuttgart Masters (indoor hard) until 2001, Madrid Masters (indoor hard) from 2002–08, and Shanghai Masters (outdoor hard) 2009 – present.
