The 2012–13 Süper Lig (known as the Spor Toto Süper Lig for sponsorship reasons) was the 55th season of the Süper Lig, the highest football league of Turkey. Galatasaray are the defending champions. The season began on 17 August 2012 and ended on 19 May 2013.
On 5 May, Galatasaray won a record 19th Turkish title after beating Sivasspor 4-2.
Samsunspor, Manisaspor and Ankaragücü were relegated at the end of the 2011–12 season after finishing in the bottom three places of the standings. Ankaragücü concluded 31 years at top level, Manisaspor returned to second level after 2 years and Samsunspor immediately returned to second one.
The relegated teams were replaced by 2011–12 TFF First League champions Akhisar Belediyespor, runners-up Elazığspor and promotion play-off winners Kasımpaşa S.K.. Elazığspor returned to the top level after 8 years by making two successive promotions. Akhisar Belediyespor makes its debut in Turkey's top flight. Kasımpaşa returned immediately after their relegation to the First League in the 2010-11 season. Elazığspor got sponsporship from Sanica Boru and changed their name to "Sanica Boru Elazığspor".
Source: [ tff.org]
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1Trabzonspor qualified for the second qualifying round as they lost the 2012–13 Turkish Cup final to Champions League-qualified Fenerbahçe. So the other Europa League spots moved up one place.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
The following table represents the teams position after each round in the competition.
Source: [ tff.org] (Turkish)
Source: tff.org (Turkish)
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
