Jillian Faye Hall (née Fletcher; September 6, 1980) is an American retired professional wrestler and singer best known for her time in World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) as a WWE Diva under the ring name Jillian (Hall). She also worked as a trainer in WWE's developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling.
After debuting in 1998, Hall worked on the independent circuit under the name Macaela Mercedes. She won numerous championships, before beginning to work for Ohio Valley Wrestling in 2003 under her real name. She debuted on WWE's SmackDown brand as the "fixer" for the MNM faction. After leaving MNM, she became John "Bradshaw" Layfield's "image consultant", and managed him to the WWE United States Championship at WrestleMania 22. In February 2007, Hall developed an in-ring persona as a tone-deaf singer. In June 2007, she was drafted to Raw, where she participated in numerous tag team matches after allying with Melina. In October 2009, she won the WWE Divas Championship, but lost it to Melina the same night. Hall was released from her WWE contract in November 2010.
Hall was trained by Dave Finlay at his professional wrestling school. Debuting in 1998, Fletcher wrestled under the ring name Macaela Mercedes on the independent circuit as a villainess. Mercedes won numerous championships on the independent circuit, including Southern States Wrestling's Women's Championship. She wrestled for women-only promotions, including G.L.O.R.Y., the Professional Girl Wrestling Association (PGWA), and the Women's Wrestling Alliance (WWA), and held both the WWA Women's Championship and the PGWA Championship. She also competed for other promotions including Hoosier Pro Wrestling (HPW), where she won both the HPW Cruiserweight Championship and HPW Ladies' Championship, Canadian International Wrestling (CWI), where she won the CIW Indy Women's Championship, Mid–States Championship Wrestling, where she won the MCW Mid-American title, and Blue Water Championship Wrestling, where she won the BWCW Women's title. Her greatest independent circuit success was in the Superstar Wrestling Federation (SWF), where she held the SWF Women's Championship and also competed in numerous intergender matches. She held the SWF Tag Team Championship twice, once with Tiny Tim and once with Randy Allen. In 2002 and early 2003, Mercedes wrestled regularly for the Apocalypse Wrestling Federation and Wrestle And Respect, where she competed in intergender matches and was involved in a scripted rivalry with the "Fabulous Firebird" Phoenix over the G.L.O.R.Y. Ladies' Wrestling Championship. On January 23, 2003, Mercedes won the G.L.O.R.Y. Ladies' Wrestling Championship, when she defeated the "Fabulous Firebird" Phoenix via referee's decision at an Apocalypse Wrestling Federation show.
Hall made her debut for Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW) at the OVW Six Flags Summer Sizzler Series event on May 30, 2003, where she defeated Passion in a singles match. On the July 25 episode of OVW Television, Hall teamed up with Victoria in a winning effort defeating Nikita and Passion. She eventually signed a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) in 2004. She started out in OVW as a fan favorite—gaining the nickname "Chronically Cute"—and had a series of matches against Alexis Laree. After getting breast implants, as well as straightening and bleaching her hair blonde, she turned into a villain. The villainous turn was motivated in an angle where her implants "leaked into her brain", causing her to become psychotic. As a villain, she managed the OVW Southern Tag Team Champions Blonde Bombers (Tank and Chad Toland) alongside her bodyguard Melissa Coates and went on a spree of blinding people with rubbing alcohol in storyline.
Hall made her WWE debut on the July 28, 2005 episode of SmackDown! with a gimmick of a "fixer" for the villainous faction MNM (Joey Mercury, Johnny Nitro, and Melina). She also had a "growth" on the left side of her face, which she referred to as a "blemish", the nature of which the announcers constantly speculated over. The gimmick carried over to OVW, where the Blonde Bombers forced her to choose between them and MNM. She eventually chose MNM, but did not stay with that group for very long. As MNM's fixer, she, in storyline, helped them to obtain a photo shoot for the cover of SmackDown! magazine, and helped to fix a problem that Melina had with Torrie Wilson, by helping Melina defeat her.
Hall was later approached by John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL), a former WWE Champion who asked for help repairing his image after a loss to underdog Rey Mysterio. During this time, she was involved in her first feud on SmackDown!, against Stacy Keibler, with the two confronting each other many times until Hall cheated to defeat Keibler in Keibler's final match on Velocity, one of WWE's secondary television programs. As JBL's "Image Consultant", she had an important role in JBL's feud with The Boogeyman, which included The Boogeyman spitting worms across her chest, putting worms down her skirt and biting off her mole. She also successfully guided JBL to winning the United States Championship from Chris Benoit at WrestleMania 22 in April.
That April, he fired her after Hall accidentally slammed a cage door on JBL's head during a steel cage match and put together a "second-rate" United States championship celebration. After being fired, she turned into a fan favorite and began a scripted rivalry with former client, Melina of MNM. She defeated her in a six-man tag team match along with Paul London and Brian Kendrick and in singles competition at Judgment Day in a controversial fashion.
Throughout mid-2006, she teamed with Ashley Massaro in a feud against Michelle McCool and Kristal. In July, she participated in a Bra and Panties match at The Great American Bash which was won by Massaro. She appeared only sporadically throughout the end of 2006, competing mainly in dance and lingerie contests.
In January 2007, Hall began a scripted rivalry with Massaro centered on Hall's jealousy of Massaro's recent Playboy appearance; the rivalry turned Hall into a villain and matches between the two mainly resulted in losses for Hall. During the feud, Hall attempted to prove that she was talented in areas beyond wrestling and being eye candy by creating a new in-ring persona, in which she sang badly at every opportunity, but thought she was a very good singer. She later attempted to impress music producer Timbaland by performing a song she claimed to have composed herself, looking for a spot in a video he was preparing and a possible future collaboration on a music project, but he turned her down. Massaro, with whom she had been involved in a rivalry, was one of the Divas who was chosen to work with Timbaland instead. Jealous of Massaro's recent successes, she attacked her and, in storyline, seriously injured her, with the reasoning that if she could not appear in Timbaland's music project, neither could Massaro.
Following this incident, she had a short rivalry with Michelle McCool, who had come to Massaro's aid, and was annoyed by Hall's singing. She defeated McCool in a singles match on the April 27 episode of SmackDown!. They continued to compete against each other throughout May and June, with McCool coming out on top.
Hall was drafted from SmackDown! to the Raw brand on June 17, 2007 as part of the 2007 Supplemental Draft. The following night, Hall won her Raw debut where she teamed with Melina to defeat Mickie James and Candice Michelle in a tag team match. From then on, Hall mainly competed in tag team matches, wrestling James, Michelle, and Maria. She resumed her singing gimmick not long after, frequently appearing in backstage and in-ring segments, including a stint as one of the contestants for the WWE Idol segment on the August 13, 2007 episode. She also entered into an on-and-off angle with ring announcer Lilian Garcia stemming from her jealousy of Garcia's flourishing singing career. In October, Hall formed an alliance with fellow villainous Diva Melina, and the pair teamed together on numerous occasions throughout the end of the year. She also competed in the 10-Diva tag team match at Survivor Series, but her team was not successful.
At the start of 2008, Hall continued her alliance with Melina, both teaming with her and accompanying her to the ring on numerous occasions. Hall was utilized mainly in a backup role throughout the next few months, teaming with Melina, as well as competing in a 12 Diva tag team match at the Backlash pay-per-view in April, which her team won. In mid-2008, Hall began a scripted rivalry with Mickie James and Kelly Kelly, teaming up with multiple partners, including Layla and Katie Lea Burchill to face them in tag team matches. She continued to have a rivalry with Kelly throughout October, and was also a part of the winning team in a Raw versus SmackDown 10-Diva tag team elimination match at Survivor Series in November, although she was eliminated by Maria.
In January 2009, she formed an alliance with the Women's Champion, Beth Phoenix to face Kelly Kelly and former ally Melina in tag team matches, which Phoenix and Hall won due to the interference of Rosa Mendes, Phoenix's associate. She also sporadically competed in singles matches, losing to both Kelly Kelly and Melina. Hall then took a brief hiatus and made her return on August 3, teaming with Phoenix to defeat Mickie James and Gail Kim. Hall unsuccessfully competed at WrestleMania XXV in a 25-Divas Battle Royal to determine the first Miss WrestleMania after being eliminated by Gail Kim. On the October 12 episode of Raw, Hall defeated Mickie James to win the Divas Championship, her first championship in WWE, but lost it to Melina immediately afterwards after Melina was traded to the Raw brand thanks to the divas trade by Nancy O'Dell. The following week on Raw, Hall unsuccessfully challenged Melina for the Divas Championship in a rematch. On the October 26 episode of Raw, Hall teamed up with Chavo Guerrero in a losing effort to Melina and Santino Marella in a mixed-tag-team match. At the Survivor Series pay-per-view, Hall teamed up with Alicia Fox, Beth Phoenix, Layla and Michelle McCool in a losing effort to Mickie James, Kelly Kelly, Gail Kim, Eve Torres, Melina in a Survivor Series Tag Team Elimination match.
On September 27 episode of Raw Hall participated in a #1 Contenders Divas Battle Royal which was won by Natalya. In the middle to late-2010, Hall began a scripted rivalry with The Bella Twins (Brie and Nikki), teaming up with multiple partners, including Maryse and Alicia Fox to face them in tag team matches.
On October 2, 2010, Hall announced that she was taking a break from television as she had been assigned as a trainer for WWE's developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling. On November 19, 2010, Hall's contract expired, and WWE announced it was not to be renewed.
Hall was scheduled for a match against TNA Knockout Winter at Family Wrestling Entertainment show in Brooklyn, New York on May 14, but was pulled out of the show due to injury. On June 18, Jillian got her first victory since was released by WWE in Xtreme Pro Wrestling defeating Santana G. On June 25, 2011 at The Uncensored Rumble IV event, Jillian made her Women Superstars Uncensored debut against Kristin Astara in a losing effort. On the January 28, 2012 episode of Xtreme Pro Wrestling, Hall defeated Leva Bates. On February 5, 2012, Hall made her debut for World Wrestling Fan Xperience (WWFX) losing to former WWE Diva Melina. On September 27, 2012, Hall wrestled Tara in a tryout dark match for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) but lost.
Hall made her debut for Crossfire Wrestling on August 4, as a face defeating Jessicka Havok by disqualification after match Hall would get a measure of revenge by attacking Havok. Hall made an appearance at Crossfire Wrestling, with Reby Sky and Maria Kanellis on November 2, 2012. Hall made an appearance at Crossfire Wrestling, in support for the Make a Wish foundation on November 3, 2012. Hall made her debut for Pro Wrestling Xtreme (PWX) on January 28, 2012 at the PWX A Wrestling Odyssey event, where she defeated Leva Bates to win the vacant PWX Women's Championship. At the PWX 1 year Anniversary show on April 28, Hall dropped the championship to Shooter Storm. Jillian made her debut for Family Wrestling Entertainment (FWE) at the FWE Empire State Showdown pay-per-view, as a face defeating Jackie Gayda. At the FWE Dysfunctional Family pay-per-view, Hall defeated FWE Women's champion Maria Kanellis with Winter as the special guest referee turning heel in the process. Later that night, she teamed with Winter in a losing effort to Kanellis and Rosita. On March 17, 2013, Hall returned to TNA to take part in the tapings of the TNA Knockout Knockdown One Night Only pay-per-view, where she was defeated by Velvet Sky. On January 21, 2014, Hall announced her retirement.
Hall released her first album A Jingle with Jillian on December 11, 2007 on iTunes nationwide. The album features five traditional Christmas songs covered by Hall in her character of a terrible singer. The album itself reached number 20 in the UK Holidays Top 100 shortly after its release.
As a teenager, Hall was a cheerleader and also took gymnastics classes. After graduating from high school, Hall attended college, but dropped out in order to train as a professional wrestler. At nineteen, she legally changed her last name from Fletcher to Hall. She was a fan of Rick Martel. Hall is friends with fellow WWE alumni Melina Perez.
Hall is divorced and has a daughter from the marriage. In 2009, Hall was engaged to fellow wrestler John Toland, whom she met when they were both training at Ohio Valley Wrestling. On September 10, 2010, Hall married her new boyfriend, Mike Farole, in a Las Vegas wedding. Hall announced in February 2011 that the couple was expecting their first child together. On March 9, 2011, Hall announced that she had suffered a miscarriage 14 weeks into her pregnancy.
On April 23, 2012, Hall was arrested in Orange County, Florida and charged with battery. Following her arrest, it was reported that Hall had separated from her husband.
Finishing moves
450° splash
Missile dropkick – 1998–2002
Moonsault – 1998–2002
Sitout facebuster
Sitout full nelson facebuster – 2007
Signature moves
Backbreaker
Crash Test (Cartwheel splash)
Cartwheel elbow drop
Handspring back elbow to a cornered opponent
Hair-pull snapmare, followed by a shoot kick to the back of the opponent's head
Hair-pull whip
Fender Bender (Handstand leg drop)
Powerbomb, sometimes from out of the corner
Monkey flip
Samoan drop
Standing hair-pull
Wrestlers managed
The Blonde Bombers (Chad Toland and Tank Toland)
Melissa Coates
John "Bradshaw" Layfield
MNM (Joey Mercury, Johnny Nitro and Melina)
Orlando Jordan
Nicknames
"Chronically Cute"
"The Bombshell"
"The Fixer"
"The Pop Princess"
"The Songstress"
"The Tone Deaf Diva"
Entrance themes
"Thunderstruck" by AC/DC (OVW)
"Move It Up" by Billy Lincoln (WWE; November 2005–February 2006)
"Top Spin" by Adam Salkeld  (WWE; 2006–2008)
"Sliced Bread" performed by Hall and composed by Jim Johnston (WWE; 2008–2010)
"Toxic" by Britney Spears (Independent circuit)
Blue Water Championship Wrestling
BWCW Women's Championship (1 time)
Canadian International Wrestling
CIW Indy Women's Championship (1 time)
GLORY Wrestling
GLORY Championship (1 time)
Hoosier Pro Wrestling
HPW Cruiserweight Championship (1 time)
HPW Ladies' Championship (1 time)
Mid-States Championship Wrestling
MCW Mid-American Championship (1 time)
Professional Girl Wrestling Association
PGWA Championship (1 time)
Pro Wrestling Illustrated
PWI ranked her #24 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2010
Pro Wrestling Xtreme
PWX Women's Championship (1 time)
Southern States Wrestling
SSW Women's Championship (1 time)
Superstar Wrestling Federation
SWF Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Randy "The King" Allen (1) and Pyro (1)
SWF Women's Championship (1 time)
Women's Wrestling Alliance
WWA Women's Championship (1 time)
World Wrestling Entertainment
WWE Divas Championship (1 time)
