The 1985–86 Bundesliga was the 23rd season of the Bundesliga, the premier football league in West Germany. It began on 9 August 1985 and ended on 26 April 1986. Bayern Munich were the defending champions.
Every team played two games against each other team, one at home and one away. Teams received two points for a win and one point for a draw. If two or more teams were tied on points, places were determined by goal difference and, if still tied, by goals scored. The team with the most points were crowned champions while the two teams with the least points were relegated to 2. Bundesliga. The third-to-last team had to compete in a two-legged relegation/promotion play-off against the third-placed team from 2. Bundesliga.
Karlsruher SC and Eintracht Braunschweig were directly relegated to the 2. Bundesliga after finishing in the last two places. They were replaced by 1. FC Nuremberg and Hannover 96. Karlsruhe and Braunschweig were eventually joined in demotion by relegation/promotion play-off participant Arminia Bielefeld, who lost on aggregate against 1. FC Saarbrücken.
^1 Waldhof Mannheim played their matches in nearby Ludwigshafen because their own ground did not fulfil Bundesliga requirements.
Source: www.dfb.de
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1As Bayern Munich !Bayern Munich also won the domestic cup competition, the Cup Winners' Cup spot was given to losing finalists Stuttgart, while Stuttgart's original UEFA Cup was transferred to Leverkusen.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Borussia Dortmund and third-placed 2. Bundesliga team SC Fortuna Köln had to compete in a two-legged relegation/promotion play-off. After a two-leg series, both teams were tied 3–3 on aggregate, so a deciding third match had to be scheduled. Dortmund won this match, 8–0, and retained their Bundesliga status.
Source: www.dfb.de
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
22 goals
 Stefan Kuntz (VfL Bochum)
21 goals
 Karl Allgöwer (VfB Stuttgart)
20 goals
 Frank Neubarth (SV Werder Bremen)
17 goals
 Cha Bum-Kun (Bayer 04 Leverkusen)
16 goals
 Thomas Allofs (1. FC Kaiserslautern)
 Jürgen Klinsmann (VfB Stuttgart)
 Klaus Täuber (FC Schalke 04)
15 goals
 Dieter Hoeneß (FC Bayern Munich)
14 goals
 Herbert Waas (Bayer 04 Leverkusen)
 Jürgen Wegmann (Borussia Dortmund)
1985–86 2. Bundesliga
1985–86 DFB-Pokal
