The Algeria national football team represents Algeria in association football and is controlled by the Algerian Football Federation. The team plays its home games at the Stade 5 Juillet 1962 in Algiers and their head coach is former French footballer Christian Gourcuff. Algeria joined FIFA on 1 January 1964, a year and a half after gaining independence.
Algeria has qualified for four World Cups in 1982, 1986, 2010 and 2014. Algeria has also won the African Cup of Nations once in 1990, when they hosted the tournament. At the 2014 World Cup, Algeria became the first African team to score four goals in a match at the World Cup after scoring four goals against South Korea.
The traditional rivals of Algeria have been Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt. However, more recently, Egypt has become the main rival after a number of incidents involving the two teams, most recently during the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification, in which Algeria defeated Egypt 1–0 in a tense tiebreaker in Omdurman in Sudan to qualify to the World Cup. A few months later, Algeria was then defeated by Egypt 0-4 in a tense match in Angola during the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations, which added to the rivalry.
The team was established in 1962 after gaining independence from France, as the successor of the FLN football team. Under French rule, Algeria was not allowed to have a national team, the FLN football team was sort of a rebellion against the French colonization. All of their games where considered friendlies and where unrecognized by FIFA. After the Algerian national football team was officially recognized by FIFA in 1963, the team only managed to qualify to the 1968 African Cup of Nations and failed to qualify for the next 5 editions of the African cup until 1980, where The Algerians had a great run. After finishing first in their group, Algeria beat rivals Egypt in the semi finals and reached the final for the first time, losing only to tournament hosts Nigeria 3–0. That tournament was considered the birth of the Algerian team as one of the big teams in Africa.
1982 FIFA World Cup Algeria caused one of the great World Cup upsets on the first day of the tournament with a 2–1 victory over the reigning European champions, West Germany. In the final match in the group between West Germany, Austria and Chile, with Algeria having already played their final group game the day before, the European teams knew that a West German win by 1 or 2 goals would qualify them both, while a larger German victory would qualify Algeria over Austria, and a draw or an Austrian win would eliminate the Germans. After 10 minutes of all-out attack, West Germany scored through a goal by Horst Hrubesch. After the goal was scored, the two teams kicked the ball around aimlessly for the rest of the match. Chants of "Fuera, fuera" ("Out, out") were screamed by the Spanish crowd, while angry Algerian supporters waved banknotes at the players. This performance was widely deplored, even by the German and Austrian fans. Algeria protested to FIFA, who ruled that the result be allowed to stand; FIFA introduced a revised qualification system at subsequent World Cups in which the final two games in each group were played simultaneously.
1986 FIFA World Cup In 1984, Algeria took third place in the 1984 Africa Cup of Nations in Côte d'Ivoire. During the 1986 Africa Cup of Nations, the national teams recorded two defeats and one draw and was eliminated in the first round. In Mexico, at the 1986 FIFA World Cup, the Algerians were not able to pass the first round once again in a group that included Northern Ireland (1–1 draw), Brazil (1–0 loss), and Spain (3–0 loss). Only one Algerian managed to score during this competition: Djamel Zidane. From thereon, Algeria failed to qualify for another World Cup until 2010.
1990 African Cup of Nations In 1990, Algeria hosted the 1990 African Cup of Nations for the first time and were strongly considered to win the competition. drawn In Group A, the Algerians started the tournament by beating Nigeria 5–1, with doubles by Djamel Menad and Rabah Madjer and a goal by Djamel Amani. After a great start with a convincing victory against the Nigerians, they then beat Côte d'Ivoire 3–0, with goals by Djamel Menad, Tahar Cherif El Ouazzani, and Cherif Oudjani. The last game of the group, Algeria beat Egypt 2–0, with goals by Djamel Amani and Moussa Saib. After a perfect start with three wins in as many games, Algeria beat Senegal 2–1 in the semi finals after Djamel Menad and Djamel Amani scored in front of 85,000 fans in the Stade 5 Juillet 1962 to reach the final for the second time in history. In the final against Nigeria, in front of 105,302 fans in the same stadium, Cherif Oudjani, in the 38th minute, enabled Algeria to win the African Nations Cup for the first time. Djamel Menad was crowned top scorer of the competition with four goals.
After winning the 1990 African Cup of Nations and barely missing out in qualifying to the 1990 FIFA World Cup, Algerian football was still at its peak and seemed to be moving towards the right direction while dominating fellow African teams with their unique north African style of play, mixed with physical but very technical football. However, with Algeria being on the brink of a civil war in the early 90s, social and political unrest started having a negative impact in every domain in the country including football. Although Algeria managed to qualify to the 1992 African Cup of Nations, the title holders were disappointing and were eliminated in the first round of the competition.
In the 1994 African Cup of Nations Algeria was disqualified from the tournament after fielding an ineligible player, and many fans back home strongly criticized the staff of the team accusing them of being irresponsible and unprofessional. In 1996, Algeria returned to African Cup of Nations, but were eliminated by hosts South Africa in the quarter-finals. The Algerians failed to qualify for the following World Cups in 1998, 2002 and 2006. During the 1998 African Cup of Nations, Algeria finished last in its group with three defeats and was eliminated in the group stage. Algerian football was losing its reputation and the team that was once considered one of the best and most feared teams in Africa, was no longer feared.
In the 2000 African Cup of Nations, the Fennecs managed to pass the first round only to lose to 2–1 to eventual champions Cameroon in the quarter-finals. Algeria once more failed to pass the first round in the African competition in 2002. but in the 2004, Algeria, coached by Rabah Saadane where looking good and full of confidence, After drawing the first game of the group 1–1 against tournament favorites Cameroon, Algeria recorded a historic win against arch rivals Egypt 2–1. After a good start by Algeria, the north African side surprisingly lost the last game of the group against Zimbabwe 2–1 However, because of the 2–1 victory against Egypt, Algeria finished second in their group and advanced to the next round. Their next opponent was Morocco and after a goalless game for over 80 minutes, Algeria took the lead in the 84th minute after a goal from Abdelmalek Cherrad, nearly seconds before the final whistle Morocco managed to score which meant the two sides would have to play in extra time where Morocco would go on to win 3–1. The loss against their North African neighbors was heart breaking and after that game, Algeria failed to qualify for the following two Africa Cup of Nations in 2006 and 2008 and nothing seemed to be working for Algerian football.
World Cup 2010 qualifiers
On October 11, 2008, Algeria returned to the top 20 African teams in the Fifa ranking by finishing first in their group ahead of Senegal, Gambia, and Liberia for the second round In the combined 2010 World Cup and 2010 African Cup of Nations qualifications. In the third and final round of the qualifiers, Algeria was joined by Zambia, Rwanda, and Egypt in group c. Egypt was widely considered the favorites to win the group and qualify for the world cup however In June 2009, Algeria beat the double African champions Egypt 3–1 which ultimately changed the teams objectives from just qualifying to the African cup, to qualifying for the world cup after a 24-year absence. The next game was against Zambia where the green foxes managed to win 2–0 in Lusaka. Algeria then again Beat Zambia at home in Blida 1–0 followed by a 3–1 win against Rwanda, the Algerians ensured that the qualification for the World Cup would go down to the wire with a final encounter against Egypt in Cairo, where only a loss by three goals would stop the Fennecs from going to South Africa. Prior to the game the Algerian team bus was attacked in Cairo by Egyptian fans, leaving several team members injured. This led to a diplomatic row between the two countries. The attack prior to the game left the Algerian players in shock which resulted in a 2–0 loss in a controversial situation, conceding a goal just within couple seconds from the final whistle. The loss would mean that the two north African sides would have a to play a play-off game in Sudan with the winner qualifying to the world cup in South Africa. Algeria won 1–0 after a stunning goal from Anthar Yahia and qualified to the world cup for their third time in history.
African Cup of Nations 2010
After qualifying to the 2010 world cup at the expense of Egypt, Algeria was gaining back the respect that they lost in the early 90s. So they came in the 2010 tournament full of confidence. Being drawn in Group A, with Angola, Malawi and Mali, Algeria started poorly, surprisingly losing 3–0 to group outsiders Malawi. After that loss Algeria had to prove that the first game was only a mistake and in the following game against Mali they won 1–0 thanks to a Rafik Halliche header. In the last match, they drew 0–0 with Angola, which sent them to the second round, finishing with the same amount of points as Mali, but with a superior head-to-head record. Playing in Cabinda, Algeria faced Côte d'Ivoire in the quarterfinals who where considered heavy favorites. After trailing 1–0, Karim Matmour equalized in the first half, the Algerians where having a great game but as the game was heading into extra time Keita gave the Ivorians the lead in the 89th minute, a goal which seemed sure to seal their victory. However, the Algerians equalized with Madjid Bougherra just 2 minutes later in added time, and in extra time a perfect Karim Ziani cross found Hameur Bouazza who gave the Fennecs the lead. Algeria shocked the whole continent with a convincing win against a Cote Ivoire team that was considered the best in Africa. Next Algeria faced Egypt in the semi-finals, tensions where still high between the two nations after the World Cup qualification play-off incident and fans from both sides felt it was a must win game for them. Unfortunately for Algeria, things did not go as planned. After waves of controversial decisions from the referee for both sides, Algeria ended the game with 3 red cards which led to Egypt winning 4–0 which was the biggest defeat in the history of the teams' meetings. Algeria then lost 1–0 to Nigeria in the third place game and finished fourth in the competition.
FIFA World Cup 2010
Algeria was drawn in Group C with England, USA, Slovenia. The north African side came in the tournament in poor form, losing nearly all their world cup preparation games in friendlies. In their first game they lost to Slovenia 0–1. The match was scoreless until Slovenia's captain Robert Koren scored in the 79th minute after Abdelkader Ghezzal was sent off for his second bookable offence. In their second group game, Algeria drew with England leading to mass celebration throughout the world's Algerian communities. The Fennecs lost their final group game to the United States 1–0 thanks to a Landon Donovan winner in second-half injury time. Algeria exited the championship as one of two teams, along with Honduras, to fail to score a goal.
2010–11: A team in trouble
After the World cup, bad results were growing and growing with no wins. After a 2–1 home loss to Guinea in a friendly match and a 1 – 1 draw at home to Tanzania, veteran manager Rabah Saâdane resigned and was replaced with Abdelhak Benchikha. The newly appointed coach tried to bring in new faces to the squad to bolster their offense but poor results continued for Benchikha's side who started off with a 2–0 away loss to Central African Republic. There was a little bit of hope restored for the Algerians after they managed to beat Morocco 1 – 0 at home after a goal from Hassan Yebda but After they lost 4–0 to Morocco in the return leg, their manager resigned. Algeria failed to qualify for the 2012 Africa Cup of Nations and the nightmare continued.
2011–12: The Arrival of Halilhodžić
After new coach Vahid Halilhodžić was appointed, he managed to get few decent results before the start of the World cup qualifiers. The Bosnian coach's debut resulted in a 1–1 away draw against Tanzania, they then beat Central African Republic 2–0 with goals coming from Hassan Yebda & Foued Kadir. After a good game against Tanzania and a convincing win against The Central African Rep, the Algerian fans started to believe in their national team again and put all their trust in coach Vahid to revive the national team, and that is exactly what happened as the good results kept on coming, Algeria then beat Niger 3–0 in a friendly, and with the start of the 2014 Fifa World Cup qualifiers Algeria beat Rwanda 4–0 to start off brightly. Qualifying for The 2013 African cup of Nations was the next target for Les Fennecs and they started off with beating Gambia 2–1 in Banjul followed by a 4–1 victory in Blida to advance to the final qualifying round where the Algerians would take on north African neighbors Libya. The desert warriors ended up winning 3–0 on aggregate against the Libyans to qualify for the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations.
2013 Africa Cup of Nations: Shock results
Algeria arrived to the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations with plenty of confidence and with the emergence of Islam Slimani and El Arbi Hillel Soudani, as well as the addition to the squad of talented Valencia CF winger Sofiane Feghouli, Algeria was even considered one of the favorites to win the competition, but unfortunately for them they lacked experience and despite clear domination against their opponents, they finished last in their group after losing the first game against Tunisia 1–0 after a crucial 90'minute goal from Youssef Msakni. In their second game against Togo, Algeria was widely expected to come out with a victory but again the lack of experience was once again crucial, after dominating the game, they conceded 2 goals and where officially eliminated from the competition. The last game against Ivory Coast ended in a 2–2 draw. The Algerian fans where extremely disappointed with their team's early exist from the competition, and the Algerian media even speculated coach Vahid would be sacked, but the president of the Algerian Football Federation decided to maintain Vahid, arguing that the team is heading in the right direction and just needs more time to gain experience.
Road to Brazil
After a disappointing campaign in the 2013 Africa Cup of Nations, and the Algerian Football Federation confirming their manager's stay. Algeria would then focus on their World cup qualifying campaign which they had a decent start to with one win and one loss, They continued their campaign winning 3–1 versus Benin at home and beating them again 3–1 away in Benin. After travelling to Kigali to face Rwanda, a 1–0 away victory guaranteed them the first-place position in their group which means they would advance to the final round of the qualifying campaign. Their last game didn't have any effect on the standings but Algeria still won 1–0 versus Mali national football team. After topping group H, Algeria was drawn with Burkina Faso as their final opponent. The 1st leg was held in Burkina, and the second was in Algeria. The first leg ended in a 3–2 loss to Burkina Faso and it outraged a lot of Algerian fans as Burkina was awarded a false penalty. The second leg was a harsh game but Algeria managed to scrap a 1–0 victory to advance to the 2014 FIFA World Cup.
Algeria were drawn in Group H with Belgium, Russia and South Korea. In their opening game, Feghouli scored Algeria's first World Cup goal for 28 years. In their second game against South Korea, Brahimi scored the fourth goal against the opposition to set a record of being the first African team to score four or more goals in a single match in the World Cup. On 26 June, Algeria played Russia for second place in Group H, Russia scored the opening goal but Slimani became a hero by scoring the equalizer to carry Algeria to the second round of the World Cup for the very first time.
After their successful World Cup, Algeria gained respect and were once more considered as one of the best teams in Africa, with young and exciting players playing in top teams across Europe.
After coach Vahid decided to opt out of a contract extension following their historic World Cup, long time FC Lorient coach Christian Gourcuff was appointed by FAF president Mohamed Raouraoua to help Algeria reach its goals.
2015 Africa Cup of Nations
After easily topping their 2015 Africa Cup of Nations qualification group which consisted of Mali, Malawi and Ethiopia, Algeria were heavy favorites to win the 2015 edition of the tournament hosted in Equatorial Guinea. Algeria were drawn in a very difficult group that included South Africa, Ghana and Senegal. With every single team in the group being in top form, Algeria struggled in the first game against the South Africans and were a goal down before finally beating them 3–1, in the second game against Ghana, the Black stars were in desperate need of a victory after losing the first game to Senegal, while a draw for Algeria would guarantee them qualification to the next round. After 90 minutes and while the game looked like it was heading to a goalless draw with neither sides looking dangerous, Asamoah Gyan struck before the final whistle to give a 1–0 victory to Ghana. In the last game of the group against Senegal, Algeria looked much better and after goals from Riyad Mahrez and youngster Nabil Bentaleb the Foxes were through to the next round. The Desert Foxes finished second in their group behind Ghana despite their goal difference due to their head to head record. Ivory Coast awaited them, where Wilfried Bony would score twice for an eventual win for the Elephants, eliminating the Desert Foxes from the competition.
2017 & 2018 Africa Cup of Nations and World Cup Qualification
New manager Christian Gourcuff was widely criticised after losing a 2-1 friendly loss against Guinea and 2-2 draw with the Tanzanians. He re-assured the FAF with a 7-0 win against Tanzania to go through to the third round of the 2018 World Cup qualification. After 3-3 draw against Ethiopia, Manager Christian Gourcuff resigned from his position. Interim Manager Nabil Neghiz took over while the FAF were searching for a new manager, leading them to 2-0 win against Seychelles which qualified them to the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations. On the 26 June 2016, the FAF appointed Milovan Rajevac as their new manager.
The Algerian national team home kit is all white with green trim, the away kit is all green with white trim.
The following players were called up for the 2017 Africa Cup of Nations qualifiers against Seychelles on 2 June 2016.
Caps and goals updated as of 2 June 2016 after the game against Seychelles.
The following players have been called up to the Algeria squad at least once within the last 12 months.
Notes
INJ Player withdrew from the squad due to an injury.RET Retired from international football.
The caps and goals for Algeria, correct on 2 June 2016.Bold denotes players still playing or available for selection.
Algerian national team results and fixtures for 2015, 2016, 2017.
Below is a record of all matches correct on 26 June 2016
(a) Denotes defunct national football team.
(b) Includes games against USSR.
(c) Includes games against Yugoslavia
Algeria national under-23 football team
Algeria national under-20 football team
Algeria women's national football team
A.^ Prior to Algerian independence in 1962, matches were organised under the auspices of the Front de Libération Nationale and it's called the FLN football team.
