Nélson de Jesus Silva (born 7 October 1973), better known simply as Dida (Brazilian Portuguese: [ˈdʒidɐ]), is a Brazilian football goalkeeper. After starting his senior club career in Brazil in the early 1990s with Vitória, he later established his reputation as a penalty kick-saving specialist with Cruzeiro and Corinthians. He is perhaps best remembered for his successful and often tumultuous ten-year stint with A.C. Milan from 2000 to 2010, where he established himself as one of the best goalkeepers in the world due to his shot-stopping ability and command of the area; he won multiple trophies and individual awards with the club, but became equally known for being prone to errors as well as his excellent gameplay, in addition to gaining media attention for being hit by a lit flare in a 2005 match against crosstown rivals F.C. Internazionale. He won one Serie A title (Scudetto) and twice the UEFA Champions League with Milan, with the first of those victories coming after he saved three penalties against Juventus. One of four Rossoneri goalies with over 300 total career appearances, Dida was inducted into Milan's Hall of Fame in 2014, and has joined other former club players for various off-pitch events and exhibition matches following his 2010 departure. After a two-year absence from playing, he returned to Brazil in 2012, suiting up for three teams—Portuguesa, Grêmio and Internacional—in as many seasons. He is currently a free agent after his contract with Internacional expired in December 2015.
On the international level, Dida earned 91 caps in eleven years with the Brazil national team, winning the FIFA World Cup and an Olympic medal, and is the most successful player in the history of the FIFA Confederations Cup, with two winners' medals and 22 total matches played over the first five tournaments since its 1997 inception. He notably broke a color barrier during the 1999 Copa América by becoming the Seleção's first Afro-Brazilian starting goalkeeper since Moacyr Barbosa half a century earlier, and, in 2006, was the second black goalkeeper to start in a FIFA World Cup final for Brazil since 1950. He retired from international play after Brazil were eliminated by France in the quarterfinals.
Often cited as an influence among current goalkeepers in regards to his playing style and personality, Dida is the first Brazilian keeper to have been nominated for the FIFA Ballon d'Or, is the first two-time winner of the FIFA Club World Cup, the inaugural winner of the FIFPro Goalkeeper of the Year award, and is a seven-time nominee of the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper award, twice with Corinthians and five times with Milan. He has been credited with ending the prejudice against black goalkeepers in Brazilian club football due to his success in Europe, and upon joining Internacional in 2014, became the first Afro-Brazilian keeper to play for the club in 43 years.
Nélson de Jesus Silva was born on 7 October 1973 in the city of Irará in the northeastern Brazilian state of Bahia. He is one of eight children, along with five sisters and two brothers, and was raised in Lagoa da Canoa in the smaller neighboring state of Alagoas, to where his family had moved when he was three months old. His first sport of choice was volleyball, which he played with his brothers, until he discovered football by way of futsal and pickup games. His preferred playing position was that of goalkeeper, despite its longtime unpopularity in Brazilian football.
A supporter of Rio de Janeiro-based club Flamengo, he helped form an amateur squad called Flamenguinho ("Little Flamengo") at age 13, which marked his first experience in organized team play, and he took his future nickname from revered striker Dida, who had starred for Flamengo from 1954 to 1964. His footballing idols were goalkeepers Rinat Dasayev and future Seleção teammate Cláudio Taffarel, who had played four seasons in Italy and whom Dida considered a pioneer in Brazilian keepers becoming more prevalent in European clubs.
In 1990, Dida joined now-defunct Alagoan club Cruzeiro de Arapiraca, and two years later joined the youth academy of hometown team and 1992 Campeonato Baiano winners Vitória. After starting in Brazil's victorious 1993 FIFA World Youth Championship campaign, Dida made 24 starts in goal for the senior squad as Vitória finished runner-up to Palmeiras in the Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, and he became the youngest recipient, at age 20, of Brazilian football magazine Placar's annual Bola de Prata award as the Série A's best goalkeeper.
Dida was then acquired by Minas Gerais-based club Cruzeiro in 1994. In a span of five seasons, he won four state titles, the 1996 Copa do Brasil and the 1997 Copa Libertadores, while Placar twice more named him the top league goalkeeper. In January 1999, however, he publicly stated his desire to test his skills in Europe and catch the attention of the Seleção coaching staff in the process, and therefore took the club to court in order to cancel the remainder of his contract so he could sign with Milan, the only European team that had extended him any type of offer. The ensuing legal battle between the player and Cruzeiro lasted for five months, during which a FIFA ruling allowed Dida to be loaned to Swiss club FC Lugano so he could keep in shape in the meantime, though he never played a game. His move to Milan became official in May 1999 following a transfer fee paid to Cruzeiro, which brought the dispute to a close.
Dida was the third goalkeeper on Milan coach Alberto Zaccheroni's depth chart behind Christian Abbiati and aging veteran Sebastiano Rossi for the 1999–2000 season, and he thus returned to Brazil as he was loaned to São Paulo-based club Corinthians to receive regular playing time. It was during this stint that his reputation as a penalty stopper came into national renown. He saved two separate spot kicks—both taken by Raí—in Corinthians' 3–2 victory over intrastate rival São Paulo FC in the semi-final of the 1999 Campeonato Brasileiro, a feat that earned him the nicknames São Dida ("Saint Dida") and O rei dos pênaltis ("King of Penalties") from the Brazilian press. He received his first nomination for the IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper award, finishing eighth in the voting.
In 2000, Dida kept three clean sheets while allowing only two goals in four matches as Corinthians lifted the inaugural FIFA Club World Cup. He saved a Nicolas Anelka penalty in a 2–2 group stage draw with Real Madrid, and in the final against Vasco da Gama that ended goalless after extra time, he blocked a Gilberto penalty in the ensuing shootout that Corinthians won 4–3 after Vasco striker Edmundo's shot went wide right. Corinthians midfielder Ricardinho revealed to the media afterward that the team was actively seeking to take the match to penalties during the extra period, knowing Dida would save "at least one in five"; indeed, BBC News castigated the "poor final" as both teams "never look[ing] like scoring in two hours of open play", while Dida himself expressed his displeasure of penalty shootouts in that they "cause[d] suffering to the players and the fans".
With first-choice Christian Abbiati on international duty with Italy at the 2000 Summer Olympics, Milan recalled Dida and named him their 2000–01 Champions League starter, with Rossi minding the net for league play. His Rossoneri debut came in a 4–1 group-stage victory over Beşiktaş on 13 September 2000, but six days later, against Leeds United at a rain-soaked Elland Road, he accidentally dropped a late Lee Bowyer strike into his own goal, causing Milan to lose the match 1–0. His explanation was that he attempted to absorb the force of the shot and then catch hold of it, but the ball dropped into a puddle and bounced into the net. Dida was nonetheless kept in the starting lineup for the remainder of the group stage, which included keeping his first clean sheet for Milan in a 2–0 win over Barcelona on 26 September. He then lost his spot back to Abbiati for the second group stage while he made his first and only Serie A start in a 2–0 November loss to Parma. Unable to later beat out Rossi for the starting spot following an injury to Abbiati, Dida did not play again that season save for one last appearance in Milan's 2–0 loss to Galatasaray—who featured his idol Taffarel in goal—on 7 March 2001, as the Rossoneri were eliminated.
Dida was recalled again by Milan for the 2002–03 season as a reserve, debuting on 14 August 2002 as an injury substitute for Abbiati in the second half of Milan's Champions League third-round qualifying match against Slovan Liberec, in which he turned in a solid performance in a 1–0 victory that resulted in second-year coach Carlo Ancelotti promoting him to first choice. He made a then-career best 30 starts as Milan finished third in Serie A and exhibited the league's second-best defence that conceded only 30 goals (one behind champion Juventus' 29), while he won his lone Coppa Italia with the Rossoneri in 2003. Dida additionally made 14 Champions League starts, missing only the second leg of Milan's semi-final elimination of crosstown rival Internazionale with a finger injury, as Milan progressed to face Juventus in the only all-Italian final in competition history, in which Dida was relatively untested during the goalless regulation and extra-time periods save for a stop of a late Alessandro Del Piero shot. He saved from David Trezeguet, Marcelo Zalayeta and Paolo Montero in the penalty shootout that saw five of the first seven shots collectively stopped by Dida and Juventus' star goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon. After Milan's Andriy Shevchenko slotted the winner, he celebrated by leaping into Dida's arms as they were mobbed by teammates. Juventus coach Marcelo Lippi said after the match that "four or five" of his players had refused to take part in the shootout, while Bianconeri defender Lilian Thuram, who was not a participant, admitted to being affected beforehand by Dida's reputation as a penalty stopper. Dida capped off the year by becoming the first Brazilian goalkeeper nominated for the FIFA Ballon d'Or, finishing 13th in voting.
In Milan's 2003–04 Scudetto-winning season, Dida became the first non-Italian Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year after conceding only 20 goals in 32 appearances, and kept a clean sheet in the title-clinching 1–0 victory over Roma on 2 May 2004, during which he and teammate Gennaro Gattuso were struck on separate occasions by projectiles thrown by Roma supporters. Though Milan were eliminated by Deportivo de La Coruña in the 2003–04 Champions League quarter-finals, a highlight of their campaign was during a previous group-stage match against Ajax on 16 September 2003, when Dida blocked a point blank-range shot from Rafael van der Vaart at the end of extra time to preserve Milan's 1–0 win.
Milan started 2004–05 by winning the Supercoppa Italiana, but just seven minutes into the Rossoneri's home-opening draw with Livorno on 11 September 2004, Dida received the first sending-off of his career following a professional foul on Luca Vigiani. The first half of the season saw Dida nearly insurmountable in net as Milan allowed only ten goals while going unbeaten in 17 of their next 18 league matches, among them a 1–0 win over Chievo on 28 November 2004 that saw Dida perform an acrobatic save on a Roberto Baronio free kick, during which he had to change direction after the ball was deflected midflight. Ancelotti described the save to reporters as "[worth] no less than a goal". Though Dida kept 16 total clean sheets and conceded only 25 goals in 36 (out of 38) appearances, Milan faltered late in the season by going winless in five of their final eight league matches as they finished runner-up to Scudetto winners Juventus.
In the Champions League, Dida allowed only three goals in Milan's first ten matches, including a string of five straight clean sheets following a 2–1 group-stage loss to Barcelona on 2 November 2004. The fifth of these came against crosstown rival Internazionale in the quarter-finals on 7 April 2005, in which Dida kept the Nerazzurri at bay with multiple saves, notably that of a top-corner Siniša Mihajlović free kick. With Milan leading 1–0 in the return leg on 12 April, a second-half header by Inter midfielder Esteban Cambiasso was disallowed by referee Markus Merk due to a foul on Dida by forward Julio Cruz. Inter ultras located in the curva behind Dida's goal reacted to the call by hurling bottles and burning flares onto the pitch. As Dida attempted to resume gameplay by clearing out the debris from his penalty area to take a goal kick, a flare struck him on his right shoulder, missing his head by inches. The match was halted as firefighters worked to clear the pitch while Dida received treatment for bruising and first-degree burns to his shoulder. After a half-hour delay the game resumed with Abbiati in goal, and was abandoned less than a minute later after more projectiles rained down. Milan were officially awarded a 3–0 win, with Dida tying a Champions League record, then shared with Edwin van der Sar and Józef Wandzik, with his sixth consecutive shutout. Inter were later fined €200,000 (₤132,000) by UEFA and ordered to play their next four European matches behind closed doors. In the semi-finals against PSV, Dida set a competition record with his seventh consecutive clean sheet in Milan's 2–0 first-leg victory on 26 April, but his scoreless streak ended at 623 total minutes following a Park Ji-sung strike in the ninth minute of the second leg on 4 May as PSV won 3–1, but the Rossoneri advanced to the final on away goals.
Milan charged to an early 3–0 lead in the first half in the 2005 Champions League final in Istanbul, against Premier League side Liverpool, who in turn rallied in the second half with three goals in a span of six minutes, the second being a strike from Reds midfielder Vladimír Šmicer that Dida got a hand to but was unable to keep out. The third came on a Xabi Alonso penalty saved by Dida before Alonso promptly netted the rebound. With the match going to penalties after ending 3–3 in regulation and extra time, Dida stopped only from John Arne Riise as Liverpool won the shootout 3–2, and he later faced press criticism for what was deemed a poor reaction to Šmicer's shot on goal. Dida was among five Milan players named to the inaugural FIFPro World XI at the end of the season, while he finished a career-best second for the 2005 IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper award, behind winner Petr Čech and ahead of Gianluigi Buffon. He was additionally shortlisted for the 2005 Ballon D'Or but did not receive any votes.
In 2005–06, Milan went trophyless in both domestic and European competition for the first time since 2001–02. They finished second and three points behind Juventus in Serie A, before being implicated in the Calciopoli match-fixing scandal. The Rossoneri began the first half of the campaign losing as many matches (five) as they had the entire previous season while conceding 22 goals in that 19-game span, with Dida not keeping a clean sheet until the fourth matchday in a 2–0 win over Lazio. It was also during this season that his form began to visibly decline, as he began committing noticeable errors such as dropping a cross in Milan's 4–3 win over Parma on 8 January 2006 that allowed Paolo Cannavaro to score the loose ball and give Parma a 1–0 lead, and attempting an underhand catch of an Andrea Gasbarroni shot that instead bounced off his arm and into goal, resulting in a 1–1 draw with Sampdoria on 28 January that put Milan nine points behind Juventus in the title race. In February, Brazil national team coach Carlos Alberto Parreira, who had previously coached Dida at Corinthians, publicly declared that he risked jeopardizing his starting position for the upcoming 2006 World Cup if his form did not improve. Dida additionally faced scrutiny in Champions League performances against Schalke 04 and Lyon, and was stretchered off with a sprained ankle in Milan's 1–1 knockout-stage draw with Bayern Munich on 22 February, but returned for the second leg on 8 March, which Milan won 4–1. Milan's bid to return to the 2006 Champions League final fell short with a 1–0 semifinal aggregate loss to Barcelona, but Dida was praised for saves against Samuel Eto'o, Ronaldinho and Henrik Larsson over both legs. However, his Champions League clean-sheet record of seven from the previous season was surpassed by Arsenal's Jens Lehmann, who finished with ten straight.
As punishment for their involvement in the Calciopoli scandal, Milan began the 2006–07 Serie A season with an eight-point deficit, and finished fourth in the standings behind Internazionale, Roma and Lazio. Following a strike by Lazio's Stephen Makinwa in Milan's 2–1 season opener on 10 September 2006, Dida did not allow a league goal for the next 446 minutes. He played his 200th match for Milan in a 1–0 win over Ascoli on 20 September, and on 10 March 2007, he signed a three-year contract extension that committed him to the club till 2010. However, 2006–07 was also the first injury-plagued season of Dida's career, beginning with knee ligament damage suffered in Milan's 1–0 loss to AEK Athens on 21 November 2006 that sidelined him for the rest of the year. Reserve keeper Zeljko Kalac deputized until Dida returned on 21 January 2007 in a goalless draw with Lazio. Dida missed thirteen total Serie A matches due to recurring knee and shoulder problems after having missed ten games in the last three seasons combined.
Milan had to qualify for the 2006–07 Champions League as part of their Calciopoli penalty, which they accomplished by defeating Red Star Belgrade on aggregate to advance to the group stage. Dida kept four clean sheets and conceded only twice in those two qualification and the first four group stage matches as Milan topped their group. In the quarter-finals against Bayern Munich, he was criticized for conceding a stoppage-time equalizer from Daniel Van Buyten in the first leg on 3 April that relegated Milan to a 2–2 home draw. Dida then kept a clean sheet in the second leg as Milan shut out Bayern 2–0 and advanced to the semi-finals against Manchester United, but again received criticism for errors resulting in goals (from Cristiano Ronaldo and Wayne Rooney) as Milan lost 3–2, with a Milan fan mockingly putting him up for sale on auction site eBay before the site removed the listing. Dida then kept another second-leg clean sheet in Milan's decisive 3–0 home win on 3 May as the Rossoneri advanced to the 2007 final in a rematch against Liverpool. Dida saved from Jermaine Pennant, Steven Gerrard and Peter Crouch as Milan won 2–1 and he raised his second Champions League trophy, and the Rossoneri's seventh overall, in five seasons.
Dida won his second UEFA Super Cup with Milan in their 3-1 victory over Sevilla on 31 August 2007, and he became the first two-time winner of the FIFA Club World Cup after Milan defeated Boca Juniors 4–2 in the final on 16 December. He had additionally set a record with his sixth appearance in the competition, a mark that was broken the next year when several Al-Ahly players collectively earned their seventh caps in a 1–0 loss to Adelaide United. Dida, however, endured his worst season with the club, as a combination of sustained poor form and injury problems—which included being stretchered off from the bench with lumbago during Milan's goalless draw at Parma on 16 February 2008—spelled the end of his tenure as Milan's number one, while the Rossoneri finished fifth in Serie A and consequently missed out on Champions League qualification for the following season.
On 3 October 2007, during Milan's Champions League group stage match against Celtic in Glasgow, Celtic striker Scott McDonald scored the match-winner in the 90th minute to seal a 2–1 victory. As McDonald and his teammates celebrated, 27-year-old Celtic fan Robert McHendry entered the pitch and tapped Dida on the shoulder while running through Milan's penalty area. Dida initially gave chase but after a few steps collapsed to the ground while holding the side of his face, and he was stretchered off the pitch and substituted. McHendry later turned himself in to police and was given a lifetime ban from Celtic Park, but UEFA charged Dida with breaching rules upholding "loyalty, integrity and sportsmanship", as it was deemed that he had feigned injury. He was punished with a two-match suspension, while Celtic were fined £25,000. Milan appealed the ruling, feeling the sentence "turn[ed] Dida into the protagonist of the incident". Dida never commented on the incident, but before Milan's first home game since the ruling, a 1–0 loss to Empoli on 21 October, he offered a gesture of apology to the fans by pausing during warmups to bow to each section of the crowd, and he received a round of applause in response. Dida's ban was reduced to one match on 22 October, and he sat out Milan's 4–1 first-leg victory over Shakhtar Donetsk two days later. He returned for the second leg on 6 November, but missed the 4 December return match against Celtic due to illness. The death knell of his campaign came in Milan's 2–1 derby loss to Internazionale on 23 December, in which he inexplicably dove in the opposite direction of Esteban Cambiasso's game-winning goal, for which he was lambasted by fans and the press. After starting Milan's 5–2 win over Napoli on 13 January 2008, Dida suffered a knee sprain prior to Milan's next match against Udinese on 20 January and was replaced by backup Zeljko Kalac, whose solid form in subsequent appearances established him as first choice for the remainder of the season, including the Champions League before Milan were eliminated in the knockout round by Arsenal. Dida's participation in the Goal4Africa charity match in Munich on 12 July 2008 marked his first on-pitch action of any kind in a six-month span.
Dida was among a clog of goalkeepers on the Milan roster at the start of the 2008–09 season that included Zeljko Kalac, Christian Abbiati and 2007 signing Marco Storari, the latter two having returned from loan spells. With Abbiati ultimately winning the starting spot, Storari loaned out to Fiorentina and Kalac demoted to third choice following a poor performance in a 5–0 Russian Railways Cup thrashing by Chelsea on 3 August, Dida was designated to Milan's UEFA Cup campaign, in which he kept only one clean sheet in six matches as the Rossoneri were eliminated by eventual finalists Werder Bremen. He played his first league match in over a year on 15 March 2009, after Abbiati was carted off with a season-ending knee injury in the 13th minute of Milan's 5–1 win at Siena. Dida finished the year as starter with a career-low ten league appearances while keeping five clean sheets in the first six of those matches, as Milan placed third behind Internazionale and Juventus and returned to the Champions League.
In 2009–10, with Ancelotti replaced by Leonardo as head coach after nine seasons, Milan finished third behind Internazionale and Juventus in Serie A for the second straight year, and were eliminated by Manchester United on a 7–2 aggregate in the Champions League round of 16. Dida was unable to compete for the starting spot after missing the pre-season due to injury, and served as Storari's backup until making his season debut as an injury substitute for the third time in his Milan career, when Storari suffered a thigh strain prior to a 2–1 home win over Roma on 18 October 2009. On 21 October, in his first Champions League appearance of the season against Real Madrid during the group stage, Dida caught an Esteban Granero shot in the 18th minute and hurried to move the ball upfield without having complete control of it, causing him to bounce it off his knee and Raúl to slot the loose ball into an empty net. His mistake did not prove costly, however, as Madrid goalkeeper Iker Casillas erred on two goals that enabled Milan to gain their first victory (3–2) at the Santiago Bernabéu Stadium.
Dida retained the starting spot on the back of strong league performances thereafter despite Storari returning to fitness, such as a stoppage-time save from Pablo Granoche in a 25 October 2–1 win over Chievo, and double and triple saves performed minutes apart in a 2–2 draw at Napoli on 28 October. Dida kept four clean sheets and conceded an average of one goal per game as Milan enjoyed an eight-match unbeaten league run in that stretch that ended in a 2–0 loss to Palermo on 13 December. With Dida retaining the number-one jersey into 2010 and Abbiati returning from injury, Storari was loaned to Sampdoria on 15 January. However, after Abbiati played his first match in ten months on 31 January, a 1–1 draw with Livorno that Dida missed after injuring his back during pre-game warmups, he and Dida were juggled in and out of the starting lineup due to Leonardo's difficulty in establishing a definite number-one as both keepers alternated high runs of form, until Abbiati's heroics that included a saved penalty in Milan's 2–0 win over Bari on 21 February relegated Dida to the bench. Milan vice president Adriano Galliani publicly insisted that a duel between the keepers did not exist, and that it was Leonardo's choice whom to play. Abbiati became sidelined with tendinitis on 28 March, enabling Dida to start the remaining league matches and finish with his most Serie A appearances (23) in four seasons. On 1 May, Dida made his 300th appearance in all competitions for Milan in a 1–0 win over Fiorentina. He was substituted for Abbiati in the 88th minute of the Rossoneri's 3–0 season-finale home victory over Juventus on 15 May, receiving a standing ovation as he departed. His final games in a Milan uniform were post-season friendlies against Major League Soccer (MLS) teams Chicago Fire and Montreal Impact. His contract expired on 30 June 2010, ending his decade-long tenure with the club.
Dida continued to participate in club-related events after his 2010 departure. He joined Milan Glorie (a selection of team alumni) for several charity exhibition matches against other veterans from clubs such as HJK Helsinki and Vélez Sársfield, in which he was often deployed in attack instead of goal. In May 2012, he represented Milan in the 2012 Mundialito de Clubes beach soccer tournament, in which the Rossoneri were eliminated in the group stage after going winless in three games.
After two years of being unable to secure a contract and continue playing in Europe, Dida left Italy in early 2012 and returned to Brazil to resume his career. On 24 May 2012, Portuguesa signed him for the remainder of the season as a replacement for departing goalkeeper Wéverton. He made his debut on 26 June in a 1–0 win over São Paulo, and on 1 July, helped in holding Santos to a goalless draw, in a match that was billed as a duel of generations between Dida and Santos' young star Neymar. Dida made 32 starts and conceded 31 goals as Portuguesa avoided relegation from the Campeonato Brasileiro top flight, but he departed at the end of the season after his contract expired in December.
On 19 December 2012, Dida joined Porto Alegre-based Grêmio on a deal for an undisclosed duration, which was finalized after he accepted a reduction of his original wage request. He was signed at the behest of coach Vanderlei Luxemburgo, who was seeking an experienced backup to incumbent Marcelo Grohe. By January 2013, Dida had surpassed the 26-year-old Grohe as first choice, making 37 total league starts and allowing 34 goals as Grêmio finished runner-up to Cruzeiro, while advancing to the semifinal of the Copa do Brasil by eliminating Corinthians in a penalty shootout that saw Dida stop three spot kicks, notably former Milan teammate Alexandre Pato's botched panenka attempt. Grêmio were unable to advance past the round of 16 in the Copa Libertadores after losing on away goals to Independiente Santa Fe, which led to Luxemburgo's firing on 30 June.
After being unable to secure a two-year contract extension with a wage increase at the end of the season, Dida joined Grêmio's archrival Internacional on a two-year deal on 26 December 2013. At his press conference, he expressed his gratitude to the club for his contract and downplayed the rivalry between both teams, citing that he had hoped to remain in Porto Alegre for family reasons. Due to injury, Dida did not make his team debut until 23 February 2014 in a 1–0 loss to Veranópolis, but was able to supplant brothers Alisson and Muriel for the starting spot, making 27 total first-team appearances as Internacional would finish third in Série A and win the 2014 Campeonato Gaúcho. However, following a poor performance in a 2–0 loss to his former club Vitória on 10 September, Dida was benched by coach Abel Braga in favor of Muriel for Internacional's 2–0 win over Botafogo four days later, but entered as an injury substitute in the second half. Dida made six consecutive starts while Muriel recovered from a thigh injury, but lost the job permanently after Internacional were blown out 5–0 by Chapecoense on 5 October, during which he was sent off for a late challenge that forced striker Rafael Moura to take his place in goal during the final minutes of the match due to Internacional having used up their substitutions. With Alisson firmly established as the Colorado's number one thereafter and Dida demoted to third choice, his final appearance was in a 2–0 win over Passo Fundo on 5 April 2015. On 25 August, an online video of the 41-year-old Dida performing a series of acrobatic practice saves during a club training session went viral.
Dida temporarily remained with the club in an internship role after his contract expired, as he began studying to earn his coaching badges. He took Brazilian Football Confederation-required courses in Teresópolis in December 2015 alongside former Brazil teammates Taffarel and Ricardinho, and watched Internacional's training sessions under the observation of then-current manager Argel Fucks in February 2016. In April 2016, he told Gazzetta dello Sport that he planned on continuing his studies in Italy through the following year, while expressing a desire to coach Milan in the future. While in Paris on 9 June to participate in a charity exhibition hosted by Pelé and Diego Maradona, Dida declared that he was not retired and was in search of a new club with whom to finish his playing career.
Dida is the first major Brazilian goalkeeper to be known by a nickname, as opposed to the tradition in Brazilian football of keepers using either their first name or surname. He first represented the Seleção at the under-20 level as first choice at the 1993 FIFA World Youth Championship, keeping four clean sheets in six matches and conceding only two goals as Brazil were victorious. He earned his first cap at age 21 in a 1–0 defeat of Ecuador during the 1995 Copa América, in which he also started the next match, a 2–0 win over Peru, before being replaced by Taffarel for the remainder of the competition.
Dida was called up by coach Mário Zagallo as the backup to Danrlei for the 1996 CONCACAF Gold Cup, in which Brazil sent their under-23 squad, and he never left the bench as the Seleção finished runners-up to Mexico. He was named the starter for the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, but Brazil struggled through a disappointing campaign and finished with the bronze medal, while Dida gained notoriety for colliding with teammate Aldair in a 1–0 loss to Japan as both players were chasing a long ball into the penalty area, giving Japan the empty-net goal.
Dida was excluded from Brazil's 1997 Copa América roster, but returned to the starting lineup for the inaugural FIFA Confederations Cup that year, keeping five clean sheets and allowing just two total goals as the Seleção lifted the trophy with a 6–0 rout of Australia in the final. Though he was called up for the 1998 World Cup in France, Zagallo lured Taffarel out of a three-year retirement to be his first choice, and Dida was third behind backup Carlos Germano as Brazil finished runners-up to the hosts. He would not play a match for Brazil in all of 1998, which factored into his decision to leave club team Cruzeiro for Milan at the start of the next year. In 1999, under new coach Vanderlei Luxemburgo, Dida won his lone Copa América with Brazil, conceding only two goals while stopping a game-tying Roberto Ayala penalty in a 2–1 victory over archrival Argentina in the quarterfinals. He made his second straight Confederations Cup start that year as Brazil allowed no goals in the group stage and thrashed hosts Saudi Arabia 8–2 in the semi-finals, but were again thwarted by champions Mexico, losing 4–3 in the final.
Under the helm of Émerson Leão, his third Seleção head coach in six years, Dida started his third consecutive Confederations Cup in 2001, keeping clean sheets in every group stage match for the second straight time as Brazil finished second behind Japan with one win and two draws. Their campaign would ultimately end in disappointment after losing to eventual winners France 2–1 in the semi-finals and, subsequently, 1–0 to Australia in the third-place match.
With his solid form at Corinthians in 2001–02 gaining the attention of Luiz Felipe Scolari, who had replaced Luxemburgo following Brazil's lackluster qualification, Dida was called up for the 2002 World Cup held jointly in South Korea and Japan, as the backup to Marcos, whom Scolari had previously coached at Palmeiras. Dida and third-choice Rogério Ceni never left the bench as the Seleção won its fifth trophy with a 2–0 defeat of Germany. On the afternoon of the final, Dida was requested by Ronaldo to keep him company in hopes of avoiding a repeat of the events prior to the 1998 final, when Ronaldo had suffered a convulsive fit in his sleep that factored into his poor performance in Brazil's loss. They spent the time talking and playing golf before departing for International Stadium in Yokohama. Ronaldo scored both goals in the 2002 victory and won the tournament's Golden Shoe award.
In 2003, Dida started his fourth Confederations Cup, in which Brazil suffered its worst-ever finish by being eliminated in the group stage. He did not participate in any international tournaments in 2004, but returned for a fifth and last Confederations Cup start in 2005 at age 31, making him the oldest member of Brazil's starting roster. During a 1–0 group stage loss to Mexico on 19 June 2005, he saved a penalty from Jared Borgetti that had to be retaken twice due to repeated player encroachment into the penalty area, after Borgetti scored on the first attempt but hit the crossbar on the second. Dida was rested by coach Carlos Alberto Parreira for a 2–2 draw with Japan on 22 June, as backup Marcos earned his final cap for Brazil. In a 3–2 semifinal victory over hosts Germany, he faced his second penalty of the competition, which Michael Ballack converted despite Dida guessing the right direction. He became the first two-time Confederations Cup winner after the Seleção's decisive 4–1 win over Argentina in the final, which would also be the last trophy of his international career.
At 32 years old, after 86 caps earned and two previous World Cups spent on the bench, Dida was named the starter for the 2006 World Cup finals, for which Brazil prepared by holding public training sessions in Weggis, Switzerland. He was part of Brazil's unheralded defensive unit, with Lúcio, Juan, and Zé Roberto, that conceded just one goal in wins over Croatia, Australia and Japan in the group stage. In a 3-0 round-of-sixteen victory over Ghana, Dida performed a point-blank save from John Mensah with his leg, and was 1970 World Cup winner Tostão's personal choice as man of the match. However, heavily-favored Brazil struggled offensively throughout the tournament up to their elimination by France 1-0 in the quarter-finals. Dida and the Brazil defense were among the few players who avoided criticism for the Seleçāo's disappointing performance, while he became the first keeper to wear the captain's armband for Brazil since Émerson Leão in the 1978 World Cup, when Cafu was rested in the 4–1 win over Japan on 22 June.
Dida was not called up again following the July 2006 hiring of new coach Dunga, who favored younger squads for Brazil's post-World Cup matches, and he therefore retired from the national team on 1 October. He finished with 91 total caps, which ranks third all-time among Brazilian keepers behind Taffarel (101) and Gilmar (94), while he is currently the most successful player in the history of the Confederations Cup, ranking first in appearances (22) and being the only player to participate in five editions of the competition. Dida faced a total of eight penalties in his international career, saving six of them.
During the 2000–01 season, Dida was among multiple Serie A players, including Juan Sebastián Verón, Álvaro Recoba and then-future Milan teammate Cafu, who were implicated in a league scandal involving fraudulent European passports. Dida had joined Milan with a Portuguese passport in order to gain EU status, as Milan had already met their limit on non-EU players at the time with Andriy Shevchenko, Serginho and Croatian midfielder Zvonimir Boban. Following a routine check that revealed the document was illegal, however, Milan promptly re-registered him as a non-EU player. In June 2001, the Italian Football Federation (FIGC) fined the club £314,000 and banned Dida from the league for one year, while FIFA imposed a yearlong ban from international play. Milan loaned him back to Corinthians for the 2001–02 season in accordance with the league suspension. On 3 April 2003, following a court appearance in Milan, Dida was handed a seven-month suspended prison sentence.
As of 14 November 2014
Vitória
Campeonato Baiano: 1992
Cruzeiro
Supercopa Masters: 1994
Copa Oro: 1995
Copa do Brasil: 1996, 2002
Copa Libertadores: 1997
Campeonato Mineiro: 1994, 1996, 1997, 1998
Corinthians
Campeonato Brasileiro: 1999
FIFA Club World Championship: 2000
Torneio Rio-São Paulo: 2002
Copa do Brasil: 2002
Milan
Serie A: 2003–04
Coppa Italia: 2002–03
Italian Super Cup: 2004
UEFA Champions League: 2002–03, 2006–07
UEFA Super Cup: 2003, 2007
FIFA Club World Championship: 2007
Trofeo Luigi Berlusconi: 2002, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009
Internacional
Campeonato Gaúcho: 2014, 2015
Brazil
South American Youth Championship: 1992
FIFA World Youth Championship: 1993
CONMEBOL Men Pre-Olympic Tournament: 1996
Copa América: 1999
FIFA World Cup: 2002
FIFA Confederations Cup: 1997, 2005
Placar Bola de Prata: 1993 (Vitória), 1996, 1998 (Cruzeiro), 1999 (Corinthians)
IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Silver Ball: 2005
IFFHS World's Best Goalkeeper Bronze Ball: 2004
Serie A Goalkeeper of the Year: 2003–04
FIFPro World XI: 2005
FIFPro Goalkeeper of the Year: 2005
IFFHS Best Brazilian Goalkeeper of the 21st Century
A.C. Milan Hall of Fame
