Basketball contests at the 2008 Olympic Games were held from August 9, 2008 to August 24, 2008. Competitions were held at the Wukesong Indoor Stadium in Beijing, China. The United States claimed the gold medals in both the Men's and Women's competitions.
Basketball players that carried their flags at the opening ceremony were Yao Ming (for the People's Republic of China), Šarūnas Jasikevičius (for Lithuania), Dirk Nowitzki (for Germany), Andrei Kirilenko (for the Russian Federation), and Manu Ginóbili (for Argentina).
Two sets of medals were awarded in the following events:
Basketball – Men
Basketball – Women
An NOC may enter up to one men's team with 12 players and up to one women's team with 12 players. The reigning world champions and the host country qualify automatically, as do the winners of the five continental championships (plus the men's runners-up from Europe and the Americas).
The best teams from the continental championships that did not automatically qualify participated in the FIBA World Olympic Qualifying Tournament or FIBA World Olympic Qualifying Tournament for Women to determine the final spots in Beijing.
Italicized teams qualified via the wildcard tournaments.
Twelve teams are split into two preliminary round groups of six teams each.
The top four teams from both groups qualify for the knockout stage.
Fifth-placed teams from both groups are ranked 9th–10th by basis of their records.
Sixth-placed teams from both groups are ranked 11th–12th by basis of their records.
In the quarterfinals, the matchups are as follows: A1 vs. B4, A2 vs. B3, A3 vs. B2 and A4 vs. B1.
The eliminated teams at the quarterfinals are ranked 5th–8th by basis of their preliminary round records
The winning teams from the quarterfinals meet in the semifinals as follows: A1/B4 vs. A3/B2 and A2/B3 vs. A4/B1.
The winning teams from the semifinals contest the gold medal. The losing teams contest the bronze.
Tie-breaking criteria:
Head to head results
Goal average (not the goal difference) between the tied teams
Goal average of the tied teams for all teams in its group
Each team is limited to twelve players on its roster.
The four best teams from each group advanced to the quarterfinal round.
The four best teams from each group advanced to the quarterfinal round.
Wheelchair basketball at the 2008 Summer Paralympics
