Fabrizio Miccoli (Italian pronunciation: [faˈbrittsjo ˈmikkoli]; born on 27 June 1979) is a retired Italian professional footballer who played as a striker.
He scored 103 goals in 259 matches in Serie A, across nine seasons in representation of Perugia, Juventus, Fiorentina and Palermo, also spending time on loan to Benfica in Portugal; he later spent two seasons with his hometown club Lecce in Lega Pro. He retired in 2015, aftering playing for Maltese club Birkirkara.
In a two-year international career, Miccoli scored twice in ten appearances for Italy.
After playing at youth level with Milan, he returned to his native Puglia in 1995 to join Serie C1 team Casarano, where he made his professional debut at the age of 17. He then agreed for a move to Serie B side Ternana in 1998, where he scored a total 32 goals in four seasons, 15 of which in his final year at the club. His performances at Ternana had Miccoli dubbed the "new Del Piero" by many sections of the Italian media.
Following his impressive performances, Juventus showed interest in signing the player, and ultimately acquired his transfer rights from Ternana in July 2002, then loaning him to minor Serie A side Perugia for the 2002–03 season.
Miccoli showed great qualities during his first season in the top flight, scoring great goals and showing excellent technical ability. He was dubbed the Romario of the Salento, the Maradona of the Salento, and bomber tascabile (pocket bomber), due to his small stature, pace and his technical ability. His efforts helped Perugia reach an UEFA Intertoto Cup spot. For his efforts, he received an Azzurri call-up during the season and Juventus recalled him back for the following season.
Miccoli played six UEFA Champions League games for Juventus, and scored one goal. He also scored seven goals in Serie A for Juventus. However, after a fall-out with Juve manager, Fabio Capello, he did not get much playing time and the next season, half of Miccoli's registration rights was sold to newly promoted Fiorentina for €7million. Once in Florence, Miccoli showed his good qualities once again, helping Fiorentina to salvation on the last day of the season, scoring a goal to send Brescia to Serie B. At the end of the season there was a blind auction between Fiorentina and Juventus to decide his ownership, and Juventus won it by a lump sum of about €6.7 million for 3 players (Miccoli (€2.39M), Maresca (€7,000) and Chiellini (€4.3 million)). Therefore, Miccoli had to return to Turin, but he was sent on loan to Benfica. Juventus also had to pay agent fee of €250,000 for Miccoli's new 3-year contract.
In July 2006, his loan to Benfica was confirmed despite initial interest from Aston Villa. Miccoli scored two goals for Benfica in six Champions League appearances. He also became a fan favorite when he scored a magnificent scissors kick goal against Liverpool during that competition, sending Benfica to the quarterfinals. At Benfica, Miccoli attracted attention from other clubs such as Roma and Internazionale. Miccoli opted to stay one more year in Lisbon with Benfica.
At the age of 35, Miccoli said Benfica was the most beautiful experience of his career. He was one of the most cherished players by Benfica fans. He scored 14 goals in 39 matches for the Eagles in the league.
On 5 July 2007, Palermo announced on their official website to have signed Miccoli with a 3-year agreement, costing Palermo €4.3 million. He completed a 4-way swap, which Miccoli replaced the left of Andrea Caracciolo, Caracciolo for Fabio Quagliarella and Vincenzo Iaquinta was replaced by Quagliarella. He returned to Italian football in the 2007–08 season, and took part in the rosanero's third UEFA Cup campaign. He scored a total eight goals in his first season with the Sicilian club, including the winning goal in the Sicilian derby against Catania, despite a number of injuries which prevented him from playing continuously in the season.
In 2008–09, Miccoli, now Palermo vice-captain (behind Fabio Liverani) following the transfers of Andrea Barzagli and Cristian Zaccardo to German club Wolfsburg, enjoyed a remarkable seasonal start, especially after the appointment of Davide Ballardini as new head coach for the team, creating a prolific striking partnership with Uruguayan Edinson Cavani, scoring 14 goals each. He renewed his contract on 30 May.
Starting in the 2009–10 season, Fabrizio Miccoli took the role of captain leading the team through the campaign in place of the injured Fabio Liverani, and being then confirmed after the latter rejoined the team on November 2009. During the 2009–10 season, Miccoli scored 19 goals, tying him for third in the Serie A goal-scoring race. He scored a hat-trick on 27 March 2010 against Bologna, and in a home draw against Sampdoria on 9 May 2010, Miccoli scored his 41st goal in Serie A for Palermo on a penalty which he had earned, making him the all-time Serie A leading goal scorer for Palermo. The Luciano Zauri foul that earned Miccoli the penalty against Sampdoria, though it resulted in a successfully converted penalty, also caused a moderate injury to Miccoli's knee. As a result, Miccoli underwent right knee surgery on 13 May 2010 at the Villa Stuart Clinic in Rome. The moderate damage to his cruciate ligament was deemed "successfully repaired" by knee specialist Professor Pier Paolo Mariani, and Miccoli is expected to make a full recovery over the summer months.
Miccoli's strong 2009–10 season played a big part in Palermo's campaign, which saw the club finish 5th in Serie A, tied for the best league finish in club history, and narrowly missing out on Champions League football. This also brought transfer interest from English Premier League side, Birmingham City, whom despite his injury at the time and the prospect of Miccoli missing most of the first half of the next season, still bid a reported £5 million for the 31-year-old striker.
Miccoli made a strong start to the Serie A 2011–12 season, scoring twice in a 4–3 win against Inter Milan and helping Palermo to 4th place in Serie A after 5 games, recording 3 goals and 3 assists along the way. In February 2011 Palermo faced Lecce, defeating them 4-2 with Miccoli (a boyhood supporter of Lecce) scoring a freekick on the stroke of half time; Miccoli refused to celebrate, being visibly upset as he left the field and was substituted during the interval. He maintained his good form despite a lacklustre season from Palermo, with three different managers serving as head coach from August to January, and on 1 February 2012 he became the top goalscorer in the whole club history thanks to a hat-trick in a 4–4 draw against Inter at San Siro. In May 2012, he scored a hat-trick against Chievo Verona away in a 4–4 draw. On 30 September 2012 he scored another hat-trick against Chievo Verona away in a 4–1.
On 24 November, scored his goal number 100 in Serie A in the match against Catania then finished 3–1 for the rosanero. On 28 April 2013, in the match of the 34th round of the championship won 1–0 against Inter, Miccoli reached the first place in the ranking of the players present in the shirt of Serie A with Palermo, with 161 appearances, overcoming in the next race, on May 5, lost 1–0 to Juventus. Later in June, it was confirmed that Miccoli would not be offered a new deal, and would therefore be released by the end of his contract, set to be on 30 June 2013, ending his six-year stint in Sicily.
After being released, Miccoli was linked with a number of clubs including Australian club Melbourne Victory. Australian media reports suggested he had made a verbal agreement to join the Victory, however, he later signed to his hometown club U.S. Lecce.
Having been released by Palermo, Miccoli reached an agreement with U.S. Lecce and a contract was formalised 17 July 2013; he was immediately made captain of the team he supported as a boy. He scored 14 goals in 27 appearances for a Lecce side who just narrowly missed out on promotion back into Serie B, reaching the final of the 2013–14 Lega Pro Prima Divisione Play-off during his first season with the club, only to be defeated by Frosinone. The following season, the club missed out on promotion yet again, finishing 6th in Group C of the Lega Pro Championship.
On 24 June 2015, Miccoli reached an agreement with Maltese Premier League side Birkirkara F.C. on a one-year deal. He made his Stripes debut on 2 July, as a 71st-minute substitute for Edmond Agius in a goalless home draw against Ulisses FC in the first leg of the first qualifying round for the season's Europa League; a week later on his first start in the return leg at the Vazgen Sargsyan Republican Stadium, he opened a 3–1 victory after the opponents' defensive error. In the second qualifying round second leg, held at the Ta' Qali National Stadium, he scored the only goal to defeat West Ham United and earn an aggregate draw, but was later substituted and Birkirkara lost in a penalty shootout.
In the league campaign, Miccoli scored six goals in 11 games, including Birkirkara's first of the season on 21 August in a 4–0 home win over Naxxar Lions, and two on 4 October in a win of the same score over St. Andrews. On 16 December 2015, Miccoli announced his decision to retire from professional football.
Fabrizio Miccoli made 10 appearances for Italy between 2003 and 2004, scoring twice. He made his debut for the Italy national team under manager Giovanni Trapattoni against Portugal on 12 February 2003, creating the only goal for Bernardo Corradi. On 30 March 2004, Miccoli scored directly from a corner kick in another friendly match versus Portugal. He was subsequently featured in UEFA Euro 2004 qualifying matches and received another call-up in a friendly against Finland in November 2004, which ended in a 1–0 win, with the only goal scored by Miccoli from a free kick.
After leaving Juventus on numerous loan stints, Miccoli did not receive any call ups under Marcello Lippi and has since still not been called up to the Azzurri under either Roberto Donadoni or Cesare Prandelli. Many sections of the Italian media attribute Miccoli's exclusion from the Italian national side under Lippi due to Miccoli's role in court during the Calciopoli scandal where Miccoli testified against Juventus, Juventus of whom have very close relations with Lippi. Despite this, Lippi still spoke positively in the media about Miccoli, referring to him in 2005: "I am constantly keeping him under observation, He's a big quality player and technically he is really good. He is a genius. Miccoli is a forward that can be really important for all teams in which he plays." .
During the 2009–10 Serie A season, there were several calls and speculation within the Italian media and high football figures that Miccoli could make a return to the Azzurri for the 2010 FIFA World Cup, and expressed continued interest in playing for the national team.
Despite these calls, he was not selected for the World Cup and in March 2011 upon return from a serious knee injury, he effectively announced his intentions to not pursue an international career any further.
Usually deployed as a creative second striker, Miccoli is well known for his all-round attacking abilities, specifically his technique, pace, and his powerful and accurate finishing, both inside and outside the area. A prolific goalscorer, Miccoli is also a regular assist provider. Due to his pace, agility, and his technical ability, Miccoli is also capable of playing as an attacking midfielder on occasion, a position which allows him to undertake individual dribbling runs during counterattacks. He has also been deployed as a winger, where he has demonstrated his ability to beat players in one on one situations due to his ball skills and control, and curl shots on goal. Miccoli is also an accurate set piece and penalty kick taker; he frequently uses the "Panenka" gesture when taking penalties.
Miccoli is married to Flaviana, a girl he met first when he was 17 and she was 14. Together they have a daughter, Suami, who was born in March 2003. His second child, a son named Diego, was born in June 2008.
In early 2010, Miccoli made national news after he managed to buy an earring belonging to his childhood hero Diego Maradona. The earring had been confiscated by the national tax office during a visit by Maradona to Italy (the Argentine star owing several million euros in taxes to the Italian state). It was sold at a public auction for €25,000. After confirming the purchase, Miccoli revealed that he would return the earring to Maradona were he to meet him.
Miccoli is a supporter of Lecce and, before joining them in 2013, had previously expressed an interest in playing for the club in the future.
In June 2013, the Italian press agency ANSA reported that the office of public prosecution in Palermo had started investigations against Miccoli for extortion, in connection with allegations that he commissioned Mauro Lauricella, the son of Sicilian mafioso Antonino Lauricella, to collect money owed to him by a nightclub. Additionally, Miccoli was quoted in transcripts of taped telephone conversations, published in the newspaper La Repubblica, as referring to the assassinated anti-mafia judge Giovanni Falcone as "FANGO", or "filth".
As of match played 3 May 2015
Juventus
Supercoppa Italiana: 2003
Coppa Italia: Runner-up 2003–04
Benfica
Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira: 2005
Palermo
Coppa Italia: Runner-up 2010–11
Birkirkara
Maltese Super Cup: Runner-up 2015
Coppa Italia – Top scorer: 2002–03 (5 goals)
