Younousse Sankharé (born 10 September 1989) is a Senegalese professional footballer who plays for EA Guingamp. He plays as a left-sided midfielder, but also operates as a left back.
Sankharé grew up in the northern suburbs of Paris in Val-d'Oise and joined his hometown club in 2001 arriving at the Camp des Loges as a youth player. After spending nearly six years in the club's youth system and the reserves, Younousse signed his first professional contract, in June 2007, agreeing to a three-year deal.
Younousse participated in the club's pre-season earning appearances in the 2007 edition of the Emirates Cup where Paris Saint-Germain finished second. He made his league debut on 6 October 2007 in a match against Rennes appearing as a substitute in a 1–3 defeat. He earned consecutive starts the following match days playing the full 90 minutes in both a 0–0 draw against Valenciennes and a 2–3 loss to Olympique Lyonnais. After those appearances, he regularly appeared as a substitute throughout the league season, but made impressive starts in the 2007–08 edition of the Coupe de France. In the Round of 16, he assisted on the opening goal scored by Loris Arnaud in a 2–1 victory over SC Bastia. He also played the full 90 minutes in 1–0 victories over amateur side Carquefou and Amiens SC.
The next season, Younousse's play was limited appearing in only two league matches. This was primarily due to the club's impressive start in league play, where they reached as high as 2nd position. He did make four appearances in the UEFA Cup earning starts against Turkish club Kayserispor, German club FC Schalke, and Spanish club Racing Santander.
Due to the club's positive form in league play and also playing well in Europe, on 26 January 2009, Sankharé was sent on loan by manager Paul Le Guen to Ligue 2 club Stade Reims in order to increase the player's playing time. He made his debut just four days later playing 90 minutes in a 0–0 draw with Guingamp. He appeared in every following league match scoring no goals gaining experience in the process, despite Reims suffering relegation to the third-tier National. He returned to Paris on 1 July.
In March 2013, it was announced that Sankharé had rejected the chance to play for Mauritania and would like to play for Senegal at international level. He declared his international future with Senegal in December 2014. He got his first callup for a friendly against Algeria in October 2015. 
As of match played 28 May 2016. Senegal score listed first, score column indicates score after each Sankharé goal.
