Marion Bartoli was the reigning champion, but retired from professional tennis in August 2013 several weeks after she won the tournament meant she cannot defend her title.
Like the previous major, the 2014 Wimbledon Championships was marked by two big upsets. The top two seeds – Serena Williams and Li Na – both lost in the third round. That marked the first time in Open Era top seeds didn't reach the second week of Wimbledon. Five-time Wimbledon champion Williams' shock defeat to 25th-seeded Alizé Cornet equalled her earliest exit from the tournament (she lost at the same stage in 1998 and 2005), while Li fell to unseeded Barbora Záhlavová-Strýcová in straight-sets tiebreaks, and this was Li's final professional tennis match before she announced her retirement almost three months later.
Petra Kvitová advanced to her second Wimbledon final. She won defeating Eugenie Bouchard in a comprehensive straight-sets victory that only took 55 minutes (see details below). This marked the fifth-shortest women's singles final in Wimbledon history in terms of time elapsed.
Sixth-seeded Kvitová defeated her compatriot and 23rd-seeded Lucie Šafářová 7–6(8–6), 6–1 in the first semi-final, while thirteenth-seeded Eugenie Bouchard defeated third-seeded Simona Halep 7–6(7–5), 6–2 in the other. Bouchard – playing in only her sixth grand slam tournament – advanced to the final without losing a set, becoming the first Canadian tennis player to reach the singles final of a grand slam. The title match was the first grand slam final contested between two players born in the 1990s. In the first set, Kvitová broke in the third game and broke again in the seventh to establish a 5–2 lead. With Kvitová serving for the set, Bouchard broke back, but Kvitová did the same in the following game to take the first set 6–3. The second set saw Kvitová lose only three points on serve as she bagelled Bouchard 6–0. Only 10 other Wimbledon women singles champions lost "fewer games in the final than Kvitova did".
The victory gave Kvitová her second Wimbledon title and second Grand Slam title overall. After the tournament, Bouchard improved to a career-high World No. 7 in the WTA rankings – surpassing Carling Bassett-Seguso's record of being the highest-ranked Canadian woman of all-time – while Kvitová moved up to World No. 4.
