Estonia sent 28 athletes to the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy. Half of them competed in cross-country skiing, where Estonia won all of their three Turin Olympic medals. Olympic champion Andrus Veerpalu participated on his 5th Winter Olympics.
At the 1968 Winter Olympics, Italy won 4 gold medals and no silver or bronze medals. Estonia was one gold medal away from matching the record with the 3 gold medals won in cross country.
Note: In the men's combined, run 1 is the downhill, and runs 2 and 3 are the slalom. In the women's combined, run 1 and 2 are the slalom, and run 3 the downhill.
Distance
Men
Women
Sprint
Raul Olle was a reserve for the men's relay team, but did not race in any events at the Games.
Key: CD = Compulsory Dance, FD = Free Dance, FS = Free Skate, OD = Original Dance, SP = Short Program
Note: 'Deficit' refers to the amount of time behind the leader a competitor began the cross-country portion of the event. Italicized numbers show the final deficit from the winner's finishing time.
The Estonian Olympic Committee sent 28 athletes and 30 representatives to those games.
Representatives
NOC representatives were president Mart Siimann and secretary Toomas Tõnise. Estonian team representatives were delegation head: Martti Raju, press attaché Sven Sommer, Kristjan Oja in biathlon, Tiit Pekk in cross-country skiing and Gunnar Kuura in figure skating.
Team coaches
Kenneth Ellis – alpine skiing, Raini Pohlak and Hillar Zahkna – biathlon, Mati Alaver and Anatoli Šmigun – cross country skiing, Anna Levandi and Ardo Rennik – figure skating, Toomas Nurmsalu – Nordic combined, Hillar Hein – ski jumping.
Biathlon team: Egert Ispert and Tiit Orlovski biathlon service team, Margo Ool – biathlon massage therapist.
Cross-country skiing team: medical doctors and therapists (Tarvo Kiudma, Mihkel Mardna, Lauri Rannama, Meelis Albert) and service team (Margo Pulles, Peep Koidu, Kristjan-Thor Vähi, Are Mets, Magne Myrmo, Eero Bergman, Michael Hasler, Urmas Välbe, Oleg Ragilo, Raul Seema, Assar Jõepera).
VIP guests
Arnold Rüütel – the President of the Republic of Estonia,
Andrus Ansip – the Prime Minister of Estonia,
Raivo Palmaru – the Minister of Culture,
Urmas Paet – the Foreign Minister.
Judges
Kalju Valgus in biathlon.
Press
Gunnar Press, Jaan Martinson, Tarmo Paju, Mati Hiis (SL Õhtuleht), Andrus Nilk, Risto Berendsen, Tiit Lääne, Marko Mumm (Eesti Päevaleht), Veiko Visnapuu, Deivil Tserp, Priit Pullerits, Raigo Pajula (Postimees), Raul Ranne (Eesti Ekspress), Enn Hallik (Pärnu Postimees), Sulev Oll (Maaleht), Marko Kaljuveer, Lembitu Kuuse, Ivar Jurtšenko, Helar Osila, Anu Säärits, Tauno Peit, Teet Konksi, Valeri Tiivas (Eesti Televisioon), Tiit Karuks, Tarmo Tiisler, Erik Lillo, Hanno Tomber (Eesti Raadio), Margus Uba (European Broadcasting Union).
Estonian team at the opening ceremony
Flag bearer: Eveli Saue (biathlon)
Athletes: Eveli Saue – biathlon and Tiiu Nurmberg – alpine skiing
Representatives: Hillar Zahkna, Raini Pohlak, Egert Ispert, Margo Ool, Gunnar Kuura, Ardo Rennik, Kenneth Ellis, Mart Siimann, Toomas Tõnise and Sven Sommer.
Indrek Schwede – XX taliolümpiamängud. Torino 2006. Tallinn, Inreko Press, 2006.(ISBN 9985-9666-0-0) (Estonian)
Gunnar Press – Torino 2006. XX taliolümpiamängud. Tallinn, Ajakirjade Kirjastus, EOK, Postimees, SL Õhtuleht, 2006 (Estonian)
