The 2012 Tour de France was the 99th edition of the Tour de France, one of cycling's Grand Tours. It started in the Belgian city of Liège on 30 June and finished on the Champs-Élysées in Paris on 22 July. The Tour consisted of twenty-one race stages, including an opening prologue, and covered a total distance of 3,496.9 km (2,173 mi). As well as the prologue, the first two race stages took place in Belgium, and one stage finished in Switzerland. Bradley Wiggins (Team Sky) won the overall general classification, and became the first British rider to win the Tour. Wiggins's teammate Chris Froome placed second, and Vincenzo Nibali (Liquigas–Cannondale) was third.
The race leader's yellow jersey was worn for the first week by Fabian Cancellara (RadioShack–Nissan), who won the prologue. Wiggins, second in the prologue, took the leadership of the race on stage seven, the first mountainous stage, which was won by Froome, and maintained his lead for the remainder of the race, winning the two longest time trials, and not losing time to his main challengers for the overall title in the mountains. Froome came second in both the long time trials, and was alongside Wiggins on the mountainous stages.
The points classification was won by Nibali's teammate Peter Sagan, who won three stages. André Greipel of Lotto–Belisol and Team Sky rider Mark Cavendish both also won three stages. Team Europcar's Thomas Voeckler, winner of two mountain stages, won the mountains classification. BMC Racing Team's Tejay van Garderen, in fifth place overall, was the best young rider in the general classification. The team classification was won by RadioShack–Nissan and Chris Anker Sørensen (Saxo Bank–Tinkoff Bank) was given the award for the most combative rider.
Twenty-two teams participated in the 2012 edition of the Tour de France. All eighteen UCI ProTeams were entitled, and obliged, to enter the race. On 6 April 2012, the organiser of the Tour, Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO), announced the four second-tier UCI Professional Continental teams given wildcard invitations, of which one was Dutch-based and three French. The presentation of the teams – where each team's roster are introduced in front of the media and local dignitaries – took place outside the Prince-Bishops' Palace in Liège, Belgium, on 28 June, two days before the opening stage held in the city.
The number of riders allowed per squad was nine, resulting in a start list total of 198 riders. From the riders that began the race, 153 crossed the finish line in Paris. The riders came from 31 countries; France, Spain, Netherlands, Italy, Belgium, Germany and Australia all had 12 or more riders in the race. The average rider age was 30.17, with 22-year-old Thibaut Pinot (FDJ–BigMat) as the youngest rider, and 40-year-old Jens Voigt (RadioShack–Nissan) as the most senior. Saur–Sojasun was the youngest team and RadioShack–Nissan the oldest.
The teams entering the race were:
According to many observers before the race the favourite for the general classification was Bradley Wiggins. His closest rivals were thought to be Cadel Evans (BMC Racing Team) and Vincenzo Nibali (Liquigas–Cannondale). 2007 and 2009 winner Alberto Contador was serving a doping suspension and did not start in 2012 Tour. 2010 winner and 2011 runner-up Andy Schleck was not able to recover from an injury suffered in the Critérium du Dauphiné. The riders considered outsiders for the general classification were Ryder Hesjedal (Garmin–Sharp), Fränk Schleck (RadioShack–Nissan), Samuel Sánchez (Euskaltel–Euskadi), Jurgen Van den Broeck (Lotto–Belisol), Tony Martin (Omega Pharma–Quick-Step), Denis Menchov (Team Katusha), Levi Leipheimer (Omega Pharma–Quick-Step), Alejandro Valverde (Movistar Team) and Robert Gesink (Rabobank).
Wiggins's highest finishes in a Grand Tour were fourth in the 2009 Tour (later promoted to third after Lance Armstrong's result was annulled in 2012) and third in the 2011 Vuelta a España. He had shown his form in the season by winning the general classifications in three stage races, the Paris-Nice, Tour de Romandie and Dauphiné. Being a time trialist, Wiggins was thought to have been the rider most suited the race's course. The 2011 Tour winner Evans came back from an illness earlier in the season to win the two-day Critérium International and place third at the Dauphiné. The 2010 Vuelta a España winner Nibali had shown his form in the season by winning the Tirreno–Adriatico stage race.
The sprinters considered favourites for the points classification and wins in bunch sprint finishes were Mark Cavendish (Team Sky), André Greipel (Lotto–Belisol), Matthew Goss (Orica–GreenEDGE), Peter Sagan (Liquigas–Cannondale) and Marcel Kittel (Argos–Shimano). Cavendish was the world road race champion and defending points classification winner, but would not have the full support of Team Sky, with the focus being with Wiggins' general classification ambitions. He had won the four-stage race Ster ZLM Toer thirteen days before the start of the Tour. Greipel, who would have the full backing of his team, had shown his form in the season with thirteen victories. Goss was second to Cavendish at the world championships and was the new sprint leader of his team, although he had only one win in the year. Sagan was equal in wins with Greipel, of which five came in the Tour of California and four in the Tour de Suisse. Kittel won two stages in both the Tour of Oman and Ster ZLM Toer.
On 29 October 2010, the ASO announced that Liège would host the 2012 edition's Grand Départ (the Tour's opening stages), before further details of the first three stages held in Belgium at an event at the city's Prince-Bishops' Palace on 18 November. It was the first time a Grand Départ outside France had been hosted in the same location twice, with other occasion in 2004. The entire route of the race was accidentally published on the ASO website on 10 October 2011, eight days before the official presentation at the Palais des Congrès in Paris. Due to a clash with the start of the Olympics in the end of July, the Tour was moved forward a week earlier than usual.
After the opening prologue in Liège, stage one left the city with the finish in Seraing. The second stage took place between Visé to Tournai, before the race moved into north-west France. The third stage ended in the coastal city of Boulogne-sur-Mer, before the fourth ending in Rouen, and fifth in Saint-Quentin. Stage six took the race east, with the seventh ending in the Vosges Mountains. Stage eight entered Switzerland the finish in Porrentruy. A return to France saw the next stage take place between Arc-et-Senans to Besançon. The next stages, ten and eleven, went into the Alps, with the two after taking the Tour down to the Mediterranean Sea at Cap d'Agde. Stage fourteen moved the race into the east of Pyrenees, before a transitional stage taking it to the western side for the next two in the mountain range. The eighteen stage was between Blagnac to Brive-la-Gaillarde in the south of the country, before an air transfer took the race back to the north east to finish with the Champs-Élysées stage in Paris.
There were 21 stages in the race, covering a total distance of 3,496.9 km (2,173 mi), 133.1 km (82.7 mi) shorter than the 2011 Tour. The longest race stage was the twelfth at 226 km (140 mi), and stage 21 the shortest at 120 km (75 mi). The race featured a total of 101.1 km (63 mi) in individual time trials and three summit finishes: stage 7, to La Planche des Belles Filles; stage 11, to La Toussuire - Les Sybelles; and stage 17, to Peyragudes. The Col du Grand Colombier in the Alps, was included for the first time, and was among six hors catégorie (English: beyond category) rated climbs in the race. The rest days were after stage 9, in Mâcon, and 15, in Pau.
The opening 6.4 km (4 mi) prologue stage in Liège was won by RadioShack–Nissan's Fabian Cancellara. Bradley Wiggins and Sylvain Chavanel (Omega Pharma–Quick-Step) placed second and third respectively, both seven seconds in arrears, with Wiggins fractionally faster. Cancellara claimed the yellow jersey as leader of the general classification and the green jersey as leader of the points classification. In stage one a large group of riders reached the ending climb, the Côte de Seraing. Cancellara attacked 1.5 km (0.9 mi) out, followed by Peter Sagan and Edvald Boasson Hagen (Team Sky), before Sagan won the sprint finish at the summit. Michael Mørkøv of Saxo Bank–Tinkoff Bank took the first polka dot jersey as leader of the mountains classification. The next stage was won by Mark Cavendish from a bunch sprint finish in Tournai, Belgium, with Sagan taking the green jersey. Stage three, the first in France, saw the Sagan win again, crossing the finish line with a comfortable margin on the short steep climb in Boulogne-sur-Mer. The fourth ended with a bunch sprint won by André Greipel. A crash with 3 km (1.9 mi) remaining took Cavendish out of contention. Another bunch finish came in the next stage, with Greipel victorious again. The sixth stage was won by Sagan in another field sprint.
In the stage seven, the first at altitude, the last of the day's breakaway riders were caught with 1.5 km (0.9 mi) remaining, on the final climb to La Planche des Belles Filles. A select group of five – Wiggins and his compatriot and teammate Chris Froome, Cadel Evans, Vincenzo Nibali and Rein Taaramäe of Cofidis – then pulled clear in the final kilometre, before Evans attacked and Froome countered and to win stage and take the polka dot jersey. Cancellara lost almost two minutes on the day and surrendered the yellow jersey to Wiggins, who became the fifth British rider to wear the jersey, and first since David Millar in 2000. The eighth stage saw breakaway rider Thibaut Pinot attack a reduced break on the final climb, the Col de la Croix, and solo to the finish in Porrentruy, Switzerland, taking the victory by margin of twenty-six seconds. Breakaway rider Fredrik Kessiakoff (Astana) took the polka. Stage nine's 41.5 km (25.8 mi) individual time trial was taken by Wiggins, with Froome 35 seconds down in second and Cancellara a further 22. Froome moved up to third overall. The next day was the first rest day of the Tour.
The tenth stage was the first classified as mountainous. The Col du Grand Colombier broke apart a 25-rider breakaway, leaving small group to contest the finish at Bellegarde-sur-Valserine; Thomas Voeckler (Team Europcar) claimed the stage win and the polka dot jersey. Another mountain stage followed the next day, which again saw a large breakaway. The break crossed the two hors catégorie climbs – the col de la Madeleine and the Col de la Croix de Fer – before being caught chasing group containing the overall contenders. A number of attacks followed, until Team Europcar's Pierre Rolland escaped with 10 km (6.2 mi) to go and took the win at the Les Sybelles ski resort. The group of overall contenders followed, 55 seconds later. Evans was absent and dropped from second to fourth overall, over three minutes in arrears. Kessiakoff took back the lead of the mountains classification. In stage twelve, a large breakaway formed 20 km (12.4 mi) in, later reduced to five riders across the Col du Granier. They stayed together until the finish, where, with a kilometer remaining David Millar (Garmin–Sharp) escaped to take victory, closely followed by Jean-Christophe Péraud (Ag2r–La Mondiale). A transitional stage came next, with a bunch sprint finish in Cap d'Agde. Greipel took the win, with Sagan second.
In the first stage in the Pyrenees, the fourteenth, a large breakaway escaped 50 km (31.1 mi) in, and had at one point amassed a lead of fifteen minutes. Of five remaining riders from the final climb of Mur de Péguère, Luis León Sánchez of Rabobank attacked on an ascent with 11.5 km (7.1 mi) remaining and soloed to the finish in Foix. As the peloton (the main group) passed the Mur de Péguère, the race was sabotaged as a large number of riders had suffered tyre punctures from carpet tacks. Evans waited over a minute to get a replacement wheel, then had a further two punctures on the descent. Wiggins then forced the peloton to wait for Evans to return to the group. The next stage ran through the foothills of the Pyrenees. A five-rider breakaway made it to the finish in Pau, where with 6 km (3.7 mi) to go, Christian Vande Velde (Garmin–Sharp) and Pierrick Fédrigo (FDJ–BigMat) escaped and Fédrigo won the sprint finish. The following day was the Tour's second rest day.
In the sixteenth stage, the race entered the high mountains with the queen stage crossing two hors catégorie climbs – the Col d'Aubisque and the Col du Tourmalet – followed by the first-category climbs of the Col d'Aspin and the Col de Peyresourde, completing the so-called "Circle of Death". A 38-rider breakaway crossed the Aubisque, before fracturing on the Tourmalet. Voeckler attacked on the Peyresourde and took the stage win with a margin of one minute forty seconds. His stage victory and maximum points over all summits, put Voeckler in the lead of the mountains classification. Wiggins, Froome and Nibali came in seven minutes after Voeckler, while Evans lost almost five minutes to the trio, falling from fourth to seventh in the general classification. In the final stage in the Pyrenees, after a number on the leading group containing the overall contenders, Alejandro Valverde moved clear over the hors categorie Port de Balès. He held his lead to the summit finish at the Peyragudes ski resort. In the group behind Wiggins and Froome attacked their rivals to finish nineteen seconds later. Nibali came in seventh, a further eighteen down. In the following stage, six riders from a breakaway were caught on finishing straight in Brive-la-Gaillarde by the head of the chasing peloton, with Cavendish taking the victory ahead of Matthew Goss and Sagan respectively. Wiggins secured the general classification in penultimate stage's 53.5 km (33.2 mi) individual time trial. Froome place second, one minute and sixteen seconds in arrears, with Sánchez a further thirty-four.
In the final stage, Cavendish won a fourth consecutive Champs-Élysées stage, his third stage win of the race. Wiggins finished the race to become the first British rider to win the Tour de France. Wiggins finished three minutes and twenty-one seconds clear of compatriot and teammate Froome. Nibali placed third at six minutes and nineteen seconds. Sagan won the points classification with a total of 421, 141 ahead of Greipel in second. Voeckler the mountains classification with 135 points, 12 ahead of second-placed Kessiakoff. The best young rider was BMC Racing Team rider Tejay van Garderen, followed by Pinot and Steven Kruijswijk (Rabobank) respectively. RadioShack–Nissan finished as the winners of the team classification, over five minutes and forty-six seconds ahead of second-placed Team Sky.
There were four main individual classifications contested in the 2012 Tour de France, as well as a team competition. The most important was the general classification, which was calculated by adding each rider's finishing times on each stage. The rider with the least accumulated time is the race leader, identified by the yellow jersey; the winner of this classification will be considered the winner of the Tour. If a crash happened within the final 3 km (1.9 mi) of a stage, not including time trials and summit finishes, the riders involved received the same time as the group they were in when the crash occurred. There were no time bonuses given for this edition of the Tour.
The points classification leader was identified with a green jersey. Riders received points for finishing among the highest placed in a stage finish, or in intermediate sprints during the stage. The points available for each stage finish were determined by the "coefficient" ranking scale.
No changes were made to the mountains classification, where points were awarded to the riders that reached the top of the most difficult ascents first. The climbs were categorised as either hors catégorie, first, second, third, or fourth-category, with more points available for the higher-categorised climbs. The overall leader wore a polka dot jersey. Double points were awarded on the summit finishes on stages 1, 11 and 20.
The young rider classification, denoted by a white jersey, was calculated the same way as the general classification, but the classification was restricted to riders who were born on or after 1 January 1988. The team classification was calculated using the finishing times of the best three riders per team on each stage (not the team time-trial); the leading team was the team with the lowest cumulative time. The number of stage victories and placings per team determined the outcome of a tie. The riders in the team that lead this classification were identified with yellow number bibs on the back of their jerseys. For the time in the Tour's history the leading wore yellow helmets. In addition, there was a combativity award, given after each stage to the rider considered, by a jury, to have "made the greatest effort and who has demonstrated the best qualities of sportsmanship". The winner wore a red number bib the following stage. At the conclusion of the Tour, Chris Anker Sørensen won the overall super-combativity award.
A total of €2,414,246 was awarded in cash prizes in the race. The overall winner of the general classification received €450,000, with the second and third placed riders getting €200,000 and €100,000 respectively; all finishers of the race were awarded with money. The holders of the classifications benefited on each stage they lead; the final winners of the points and mountains were given €25,000, while the best young rider and most combative rider got €20,000. Team prizes were available, with €10,000 for the team time trial and €50,000 for the winners of the team classification. There were also two special awards each with a prize of €5000, the Souvenir Jacques Goddet, given to the first rider to pass Goddet's memorial at the summit of the Col du Tourmalet in stage sixteen, and the Souvenir Henri Desgrange, given to first rider to pass the summit of the highest climb in the Tour, the Col de la Croix de Fer in stage eleven. Thomas Voeckler won the Jacques Goddet and Pierre Rolland the Henri Desgrange.
The race was the eighteenth of the twenty-nine events in the UCI World Tour, with riders from the WorldTeams competing individually for points that contributed towards the rankings. Points were awarded to the top twenty finishers in the general classification and to the top five finishers in each stage. Wiggins moved in to the lead of the individual ranking, with Joaquim Rodríguez dropping to second. The points accrued by Chris Froome moved him from 52nd to 6th. Team Sky retained their lead of the team ranking, ahead of Liquigas–Cannondale. Spain remained as leaders of the nations ranking, with Italy second.
2012 in men's road cycling
2012 in sports
