Teófilo Antonio Gutiérrez Roncancio (Spanish pronunciation: [teˈofilo ɣuˈtjeres]; born 17 May 1985), known more commonly as Teo, is a Colombian footballer who plays as striker for Sporting CP.
He began his career with Barranquilla F.C., Atlético Junior's second division team in 2006. After scoring 16 goals in 28 appearances, he was called up to Atlético Junior senior team.
In his first years with the main squad, Gutiérrez found it difficult to break into the starting eleven. He managed to score his first goal on 2 September 2007 in a match against Malaga. During Copa Mustang in 2008, he earned a spot in the starting lineup and managed to score 11 goals, finishing third place in the scoring charts, just behind Freddy Montero and Carlos Quintero and tying Adrián Ramos and Milton Rodríguez.
During Copa Mustang I 2009, Gutiérrez was in outstanding form, scoring a total of 16 goals and winning the Golden Boot of the tournament. During the playoffs, he scored six goals with hat-tricks against Cúcuta Deportivo and Envigado FC. During Copa Mustang Teo ended 2009 with 14 goals, finishing second to Jackson Martínez's 18 goals.
He was named by the International Federation of Football History and Statistics as the fourth world First Division top scorer of 2009, having scored 30 goals during 2009.
On 13 January 2010, Junior sold Teo to Turkish club Trabzonspor for $3 million. During his first season in Turkey, he found it difficult to adapt to a new country and style of play, which led him not being a regular on the starting eleven.
Teo began to show progress with the start of his second season (2010–2011) in Turkey, scoring a hat trick against Bursaspor during his team's 3–0 in the Turkish Super Cup victory and earning the man of the match award. He scored two goals during his Trabzonspor debut on the Süper Lig against Ankaragücü and added two more against Sivasspor.
Gutiérrez moved to his country without permission of Trabzonspor or his manager claiming to have some health problems. After check-ups, doctors did not find any health problems, and on 3 February 2011, Trabzonspor accepted a bid from Racing Club of Argentina.
After performing at the top of his game for La Academia, while liking up with selección teammate Giovanni Moreno, Teo was forced to leave Racing under a cloud following an incident in which he was alleged to have threatened his team-mates with a paintball gun in the changing-room after a match against Independiente.
After his untimely departure from Racing Club, Teó signed a short-term contract with Lanús for whom he would play in the Copa Libertadores. His time at Lanús was cut-short after he left Argentina for his native Barranquilla, claiming to the club that he was on international duty. When it was found that this was not the case, Lanús cancelled his contract. A six-month loan to Junior was then arranged, but Los Tiburones, who had made a considerable effort in the transfer market to reclaim the Liga Postobón title, failed to reach the finals.
Teo was sold to Mexican side Cruz Azul by 3 million USD and a salary of 1.5 Million USD per year. Despite being used as a substitute of Argentine striker Mariano Pavone for most of the season, he managed to score important goals for Cruz Azul in the Liguilla while Pavone was injured, including one in the final against América which they lost. After a six-month spell at Cruz Azul, Teó said we wanted to leave to Argentinian side River Plate, even though he initially expressed his will to stay at the Mexican club. After being separated from the first squad he was finally sold to River Plate on July 2013.
After the relationship between Cruz Azul and Teo worsened due to the persistent interest of River Plate's coach Ramón Díaz to bring the Colombian to his squad, Cruz Azul and River Plate reached an agreement thought to be around US$3 million, which was around what Cruz Azul asked for. Teo has said that it was his all time dream to play for the Argentine squad. However, River Plate did not have sufficient funds for the player, eventually Teo made a return to Cruz Azul. A week later, the issues were thought to be resolved thanks to FIFA's involvement.
He made his debut in a 2–1 loss against Club Atlético Colón. where he scored his very first goal. He would later be part of the team that crowned itself champion in the following tournament, scoring 6 goals. Under the management of Marcelo Gallardo, Teo has scored 10 goals in 10 appearances (missed two fixtures due to being called up by the Colombia National Team) in the 2014 Torneo de Transición.
On July 18 2015, Sporting CP announced the signing of the Colombia International. Gutiérrez signed a three-year contract with the Lisbon-based club. He scored for Sporting in a 2015–16 Champions League play-off match against CSKA Moscow.
Gutiérrez scored in his international debut in 2–1 on his debut Colombia victory against El Salvador in August 2009. In his third call up to the Colombian national team, he made his first competitive appearance in a qualifying game for the FIFA 2010 World Cup against Ecuador, scoring the second goal in a 2–0 victory.
During the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers, Gutiérrez scored six goals in 11 matches. In June 2014, he was named in Colombia's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup finals and, after the withdrawal of Radamel Falcao through injury, took the number 9 shirt for Los Cafeteros.
In the team's opening match of the tournament, Gutiérrez scored Colombia's second goal in a 3–0 win against Greece.
Scores and results lists Colombia's goal tally first.
Trabzonspor
Turkish Cup (1): 2009–10
Turkish Super Cup (1): 2010
Cruz Azul
Copa MX (1): Clausura 2013
River Plate
Argentine Primera División (1): Torneo Final 2014
Argentine Super Liga Final (1): 2014
Copa Sudamericana (1): 2014
Recopa Sudamericana: 2015
Copa Libertadores (1): 2015
Sporting
Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira (1): 2015
4 South American Footballer of the year 2014-2015
