Guido Pella (born 17 May 1990) is an Argentine professional tennis player. In March 2016, Pella reached his best singles rankings of world number 39. On 21 September 2015, he peaked at world number 119 in the doubles rankings.
His father, Carlos, first taught him the game at the age of five. His sister, Catalina, is also a tennis player who competes mainly in ITF tournaments.
As a junior Pella posted a 19–5 record in singles and reached as high as No. 42 in the combined world rankings in 2008. Entering as a qualifier, he had a good showing at the junior French Open, upsetting first-seeded Bernard Tomic in the quarterfinals, but lost to Jerzy Janowicz in the following round.
Junior Slam results – Singles:
Australian Open: -
French Open: SF (2008)
Wimbledon: -
US Open: 3R (2008)
Pella started playing Futures tournaments in 2005, winning his first at Peru F3 in July 2008 without dropping a set. In the following years, he won six further Futures titles, all of them on clay. His first Challenger final came at Guayaquil, Ecuador in November 2011, losing the match to Matteo Viola in straight sets. He finished the 2011 season ranked world no. 350 in singles and no. 501 in doubles.
Pella started his 2012 Challenger season in March, capturing his first title in that category at the Salinas Challenger in Ecuador, with a victory over Paolo Lorenzi in the final round. The following month, he won his first doubles Challenger title at the Pereira Challenger in Colombia, partnering Martín Alund.
In May, he entered the French Open qualifying draw, losing in the first round to former world no. 2 Tommy Haas. In August, he won his first hard-court tournament at the Manta Challenger, beating Maximiliano Estévez in the final. In the US Open, he made it through the qualifying stage of the tournament, beating Lukáš Rosol to reach his first Grand Slam main-draw match, which he lost to Nikolay Davydenko in four sets. In September, he defeated Alex Bogomolov, Jr. and Leonardo Kirche on his way to win the Campinas Challenger in Brazil.
He cracked the top 100 for the first time after winning the 2012 ATP Challenger Tour Finals, defeating Adrian Ungur in the final round. Pella finished the year ranked world no. 97 in singles and world no. 187 in doubles, a career high and a 249-spots improvement since the beginning of the season.
Guido Pella entered the 2013 Australian Open main draw directly, but he lost in the first round to qualifier Amir Weintraub. He then competed in Viña del Mar, also losing in the first round, this time to countryman Federico Delbonis. The following week, he played at the Brasil Open, winning his first ATP World Tour-level match against sixth seed Fabio Fognini, losing then in the second round to eventual finalist David Nalbandian. At 2013 Düsseldorf, he advanced to his first ATP SF starting as a qualifier, defeating No. 10 Janko Tipsarević along the way.
