The 2011 World Women's Handball Championship, the 20th event hosted by the International Handball Federation, was held in Brazil from 2 to 18 December 2011.
The winner qualified for the 2012 Olympic Handball tournament and the 2013 World Championship, while teams finished second to seventh took the Olympic Qualifying tournament spots.
Norway won the title for the second time after defeating France 32–24 in the final, thus became only the second team after Denmark to possess the World Championship, European Championship and Olympic Games title in the same time. France, on the other hand, lost its second consecutive World Championship final after fell short against Russia in 2009. By winning the tournament, Norway qualified for the 2012 Summer Olympics as World champions, while Sweden, which finished runner-up behind Norway in the European Championship, moved up to take the vacated European champion spot and also secured its place for the Olympics.
Spain triumphed over Denmark in the bronze final 24–18 and won their first ever World Championship medal, while hosts Brazil knocked out title holders Russia 36–20 in the match for the fifth place to take their best ever result.
The competition took place in the Brazilian state of São Paulo. It is the third women's World Championship organized outside of Europe, after South Korea in 1990 and China in 2009.
Initially, the matches had to take place in the state of Santa Catarina.
Four cities have been selected to host the matches:
Host nation
 Brazil
Defending champions
 Russia
Qualified from the 2010 African Championship
 Angola
 Ivory Coast
 Tunisia
Qualified from the 2010 European Championship
 Norway
 Sweden
 Romania
Qualified from the 2010 Asian Championship
 China
 Japan
 Kazakhstan
 South Korea
Qualified from the 2011 American Championship
 Argentina
 Cuba
 Uruguay
Qualified from the 2011 Oceania Championship
 Australia
Qualified from European play-offs
 Croatia
 Denmark
 France
 Germany
 Iceland
 Montenegro
 Netherlands
 Spain
Eight European teams qualified for the World Championships through play-offs. The draw was made on 19 December. The first legs were played on 4/5 June with the second legs on 11/12 June.
The draw was held on 2 July 2011 at 21:00 local time.
The seeding was announced on June 24.
TH = Title holder
A provisional scheduled was released on June 24. Brazil played the opening game on December 2. On July 7 the venues for each preliminary round were announced by the IHF. The detailed match schedule was released on August 31. As all Handball world championships, the tie-breakers in case of point tie betwin two or more teams were: 1.Points in matches between tied teams 2. Goal difference in matches between tied teams 3. Goaldifference in all group matches 4. Most scored goals in all group matches, 5. Draw.
All times are local (UTC−2).
Venue: Arena Santos, Santos Angola won the tie-break for second place due to a better record in matches between them, Montenegro and Iceland. In those direct encounters all three got 2 points but Angola's +2 goal difference beat Montenegro's +1 and Iceland's –3.
Venue: Ginásio José Corrêa, Barueri
Venue: Ginásio do Ibirapuera, São Paulo
Venue: Ginásio Adib Moyses Dib, São Bernardo do Campo
Championship bracket
5th place bracket
Fifth and sixth place finishers from the group compete in the President's Cup to determine the places 17 through 24.
No placement matches for places 9 to 16 were played, but as those places might be decisive for qualification to the Olympics, the regulations ranked those teams. The losing teams of the Round of 16 were ranked based on a their group stage record (points, goal-difference, goals scored) against teams placed 1st to 4th (those advancing to the Round of 16).
