Zimbabwe Premier Soccer League is the top professional division of the Zimbabwe Football Association. It was created in 1980, as a successor to the 1962 formed Rhodesia National Football League. It is currently sponsored by Delta Beverages under the Castle Lager brand and hence is known as Castle Lager Premier Soccer League. The current sponsorship deal runs from 2011 and is worth $3,6 million.
The league consists of 16 teams listed below, that play a total of 30 matches. The season runs from April to November. Most matches are played during weekends on Saturdays and Sundays. Postponed matches are played midweek. At the end of the season four teams are relegated into the lower division and an equal number promoted.
The end of season winner qualifies for the CAF Champions League, while the Cup of Zimbabwe winners gains entry into the CAF Confederation Cup. The current champions are Chicken Inn who won the 2015 Zimbabwe Premier Soccer League. For the current season, see 2016 Zimbabwe Premier Soccer League.
Border Strikers (Beitbridge)
Bulawayo City (Bulawayo)
CAPS United (Harare)
Chapungu United (Gweru)
Chicken Inn (Bulawayo)
Dynamos (Harare)
Harare City (Harare)
Highlanders (Bulawayo)
How Mine (Bulawayo)
Hwange (Hwange)
Mutare City Rovers (Mutare)
Ngezi Platinum Stars (Selous)
Platinum (Zvishavane)
Triangle United (Chiredzi)
Tsholotsho (Tsholotsho)
ZPC Kariba (Kariba)
Updated to games played on 28 November 2015.
Source: FIFA.com
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) goals scored; 4) head-to-head points; 5) head-to-head goal difference; 6) head-to-head goals scored; 7) head-to-head away goals(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Promoted:
Ngezi Platinum Stars (Selous) (winners Northern Region Division One)
Bulawayo City (winners Southern Region Division One)
Border Strikers (Beitbridge) (winners Central Region Division One)
Mutare City Rovers (winners Eastern Region Division One)
From 2011, the Premier Soccer League has had title sponsorship rights sold to Delta Beverages, who sponsor the league under their Castle Lager brand. The deal runs until 2018. Originally a lower income level, in 2014 Delta Beverages upped their sponsorship to $3,6 million.
Currently, the Premier Soccer League has a television deal with SuperSport who broadcast matches regularly across Africa.
Soccer Star of the Year
