Desmond Sinclair "Des" Walker (born 26 November 1965 in Homerton, London) is a former England international footballer with 59 full caps. He played with distinction at two major international football finals.
At club level he played in seven cup finals for Nottingham Forest at Wembley winning five of them. He was Forest's player of the year three times. On four straight occasions at Forest he was selected for the PFA Team of the Year. At Sheffield Wednesday he picked up another club player of the year accolade. He played in twenty seasons of senior football. All but the last three of those were in the top flight in either England or Italy.
Walker was a pacey and hard-tackling central defender regarded for the consistently high quality of his defending through the first half of his playing career. Defensively he was among the best markers and timers of the tackle of the television era in English football. His speed allowed him to repeatedly recover difficult situations for his teams.
His strengths were as an out and out defender rather than someone accomplished at bringing or distributing the ball from the back. At set pieces for his teams he would stay back to provide defensive cover rather than supplement the attack. This is reflected in that in playing around 800 senior games he only scored once for his teams.
He played in 20 seasons of senior football with all but the last three of those in the top flight. Other than a brief spell in the USA he only played for three clubs. None of the three were ever genuine contenders for a league championship. He played in 7 cup finals with Nottingham Forest at Wembley winning five. Perhaps a more useful indication of the consistency of his excellence are the individual accolades he collected when at his peak. In the last six seasons of his first spell at Forest he was Player of the Year three times. In the last four of those seasons he was selected for the PFA Team of the Year each time. On his return from his season in Italy he was Sheffield Wednesday's player of the year in his first season there. Following his full international debut in 1988 he became the quickest player to collect 50 full England caps taking just over 4 years.
Walker rarely missed matches. He incurred a remarkably low number of bookings during the first 10 years of his career. This was despite his often dispossessing opponents with sliding challenges from all directions. While not being the tallest centre-back he could leap to beat the tallest forwards in the air and his pace meant even the quickest and most skilful forwards very rarely got any change from him.
At the height of his career, Forest, Owls and England fans frequently chanted "You'll never beat Des Walker." This was turned into "You'll never meet Des Walker" as a private joke among journalists, commenting on Walker's refusal to talk to the press at this point.
He was spotted playing locally in London and was signed by Forest in 1980 as an apprentice. Known for being unafraid of pitching youngsters into the first team if they were good enough, Forest manager Brian Clough, trying to build a second great side after his ageing European Cup winning team broke up, gave Walker his debut in March 1984 at the age of 18, just two months before the end of the 1983–84 First Division campaign. Forest finished third and qualified for the UEFA Cup. In a minor statistical anomaly in Walker's nine seasons of first team football at Forest they only finished the league in three different positions - third (three times), eight (four times) and ninth (twice).
In 1987 Walker earned the first of his club player of the year awards at Forest.
Forest won the Football League Centenary Tournament in April 1988 (their first senior trophy since 1981). They finished third in the league in 1988. That form also carried them to the semi-finals of that season's FA Cup with Walker in outstanding form.
Forest won the 1989 Full Members Cup beating Everton 4-3 in the final after extra time. They won a second cup that season, the League Cup with a 3–1 victory at Wembley over Luton Town.
With Forest now chasing a unique cup treble tragedy struck a week after the League Cup triumph. Forest and Liverpool met for the second season in a row in the FA Cup semi-finals. The Hillsborough disaster claimed the lives of 96 Liverpool fans. When the emotion laden re-scheduled game took place Forest struggled as Liverpool won 3–1. Forest finished third in the First Division for a second successive year. However they were unable to compete in the UEFA Cup as the ban on English clubs in European competition, arising from the Heysel tragedy of 1985, still had one season to run. Walker was selected for the PFA Team of the Year for the first time.
Walker won his second League Cup winner's medal when Forest retained the trophy in 1990 with victory over Oldham Athletic. He earned his second Forest player of the year accolade. He was also selected for the PFA Team of the Year for the second successive season.
Despite English clubs being re-admitted to Europe for the 1990–91 season, places in the competition were initially limited, and 1990 League Cup winners Forest were not included; the only UEFA Cup place that season went to league runners-up Aston Villa. Walker was now in his 25th year, and despite playing for one of England's most successful clubs, he had not yet been given a chance to prove himself in European competition.
Walker scored an own goal in the 1991 FA Cup Final that lost 2-1 to Tottenham Hotspur. Roy Keane played in central midfield for Forest. Later in his autobiography Keane admitted he should not have declared himself fit to play as he hadn't recovered from injury. Yet again Walker missed the chance of playing in Europe. The otherwise excellent consistency of his form earned him a third successive selection for the PFA Team of the Year.
On New Year's Day 1992, Walker scored his only goal in professional football, the equaliser in a 1–1 draw against Luton. That season Forest won the Full Members Cup for a second time beating Southampton 3-2 after extra time. Forest reached another League Cup final but lost to Manchester United. Forest had now played in seven domestic cup finals at Wembley in five seasons winning five of the finals. Walker signed off from Forest as their player of the year for the third time in six seasons. He also earned a fourth successive selection for the PFA Team of the Year. One other player was selected in the same four PFA Teams of the Year, Walker's team mate Stuart Pearce who earned selection five seasons in a row.
After the Euro 1992 finals he was sold for £1.5 million to Italian side Sampdoria coached by Sven-Göran Eriksson. Samp finished the season placed seventh in Serie A. Despite playing 30 of Samp's league games he was largely played out of position at full back. He stayed just one season before returning to England.
Sampdoria were runners up in the 1992 European Cup Final in the season prior to Walker's arrival. However they finished sixth in 1992 in Serie A. Nor did they win the 1992 Coppa Italia. Thus they took no part in any UEFA competition in Walker's 1992/93 season there.
Walker joined Sheffield Wednesday for £2.7 million in 1993. Walker made more than 300 appearances for Sheffield Wednesday under eight different managers in eight years. He quickly became a favourite of the fans earning their player of the year award at the end of his first season. He also picked up the captain's armband. His time at Sheffield Wednesday brought mixed fortunes although he played in the overwhelming majority of the club's games following his arrival.
In that first season, Wednesday finished seventh in the Premier League, but blew what was effectively their last chance of silverware in February. They suffered a hefty defeat at the hands of Manchester United in the semi-finals of the League Cup. In 1994–95 Wednesday finished in 13th and 15th in 1995–96. Wednesday were never in any acute danger of relegation on either occasion.
In 1995-96 Wednesday played four games in the group stage of the Intertoto Cup.
1996–97 began brilliantly for Wednesday topping the Premier League at the end of August. However they were unable to keep up their excellent form. They finished the season in seventh as they had three seasons before. They also had the best FA Cup run in Walker's time their reaching the last eight. In the next two seasons Wednesday finished 16th and 12th respectively in the top division.
They were then relegated in 1999–2000. Walker played in seven seasons of top tier football with Wednesday to add to his nine at Forest and one with Samp. In a disappointing 2000–01 season in the 24 team second tier Wednesday finished 17th. Amid Sheffield Wednesday's growing financial strain associated with their fall from the upper league Walker was released from his contract in 2001.
In 2007, he came out top alongside Peter Swan in a poll to find Sheffield Wednesday's two greatest ever centre backs on the website Vital Football.
He briefly trained with his ex-Forest team-mate Nigel Clough at Burton Albion (where he was manager) and a short stint in the US playing for the New York Metro Stars in their 9/11 benefit matches against D.C. United. Forest manager, Paul Hart then asked if Walker could train with Forest, who were now a struggling in the second tier of English football. In July 2002, Walker signed for Forest on a permanent basis.
Walker made almost 60 more appearances in his second spell for Forest, nearly a decade after he had left them, and finally left the club at the age of 38 with a total of 354 appearances for the club to his name – and one goal. His final competitive appearance for Forest came against Wigan Athletic on 7 August 2004.
A testimonial match was held in his honour – this drew thousands of spectators but controversy was caused when the player was arrested several hours later. He became first team coach at Forest afterwards but left in January 2005 when Gary Megson was appointed as manager.
Walker made his international debut as a substitute for Tony Adams in a game against Denmark in 1988. It was not long before Walker was a regular starter in the side against competition from Adams, Terry Butcher and Mark Wright.
At the 1990 FIFA World Cup, Walker started all seven of the games in which England would play, gaining international acclaim which was only overshadowed by another new young star in Paul Gascoigne. Playing in a three-man defence alongside Wright and Butcher, Walker shrugged off knocks and fatigue to enjoy a superb tournament, which ended when England were knocked out in a penalty shootout by West Germany in the semi-finals.
Walker subsequently became England's defensive linchpin after Butcher decided to retire, continuing to feature regularly after Graham Taylor had taken over as manager. As an almost ever-present during a period when England played a relatively large number of internationals, Walker became the fastest player in history to reach 50 caps, a feat he accomplished in just over four years playing in 50 of his country's 53 internationals
Walker then travelled with the England squad to the 1992 UEFA European Football Championship in Sweden but England failed to get beyond the group stages. Walker's trademark excellent defending made him one of the few bright spots of the England performance.
On 28 April 1993, in a 1994 World Cup qualifier, England were leading 2–1 against the Netherlands. With four minutes remaining the exceptionally paced Marc Overmars became the first person in Walker's then 52 internationals to beat the defender for speed. With little choice Walker brought the Dutchman down. Peter van Vossen put the penalty away and the game ended 2-2.
A month later on 29 May in Chorzow Walker was again beaten in a foot race. Poland's Dariusz Adamczuk got to the ball first and with one touch lobbed Chris Woods to score.
Four days later, on 2 June 1993, England's hopes of qualifying were dealt a further blow during a 0–2 loss away to Norway. Walker's defensive authority was compromised by Taylor's imposition of an untested wing back system. Walker was largely at fault for the first goal. After committing a foul near the corner flag Walker began to argue with the referee. He was caught out with a quick free kick leading to a cross for Øyvind Leonhardsen to score.
Walker played in a three game Summer tour of the host nation of the following year's finals, USA. He them missed other crucial qualifiers, a 3–0 win over Poland and a decisive 0–2 loss against the Netherlands in Rotterdam. Walker played in England's last qualifier in the group in November 1993. San Marino scored the fastest World Cup goal ever after just eight seconds capitalising on an under hit Stuart Pearce pass back. England won 7–1 but failed to make the finals (they had needed to win by seven clear goals and hope that the Netherlands lost in Poland, but the Dutch won anyway so England's result was academic). This was Taylor's last match in charge of the England team. No subsequent England Manager picked Walker despite his continuing to play professionally at club level for the next 11 years.
Walker's international career ended with 59 caps and no goals.
Walker has two sons who are both professional footballers. Older son Tyler Walker plays for Nottingham Forest; his younger brother, Lewis Walker, joined Derby County from Ilkeston in January 2016.
Nottingham Forest
Football League Cup: 1988–89, 1989–90
Full Members Cup: 1988–89, 1991–92
Football League Centenary Tournament: 1988
Individual
PFA Team of the Year - 4 consecutive appearances (1989 - 1992)
Club Player of the Year awards - 4 seasons
