Hell in a Cell (2014) was a professional wrestling pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by WWE. It took place on October 26, 2014 at the American Airlines Center in Dallas, Texas. It was the sixth annual Hell in a Cell event.
Eight matches were contested on the main card while one match took place on the pre-show which was streamed live on the WWE Network. The card featured two Hell in a Cell matches, where John Cena defeated Randy Orton to secure a future WWE World Heavyweight Championship match, and, in the main event, Seth Rollins defeated Dean Ambrose.
The event had 83,000 buys (excluding WWE Network views), down from the previous year's 228,000 buys.
The professional wrestling matches at Hell in a Cell featured professional wrestlers performing as characters in scripted events pre-determined by the hosting promotion, WWE. Storylines between the characters played out on WWE's primary television programs, Raw and SmackDown.
At Night of Champions, Dean Ambrose returned to the WWE after a one-month hiatus, attacking Seth Rollins. Later on in the show, John Cena defeated Brock Lesnar by disqualification for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship when Rollins attacked Cena. Rollins then attempted to cash in his Money in the Bank contract on Lesnar, but was stopped by Cena. On the September 29 edition of Raw, Cena and Ambrose defeated Kane and Randy Orton by disqualification after Rollins attacked Ambrose. On the October 6 edition of Raw, Cena defeated Rollins, Orton and Kane by disqualification in a handicap match. Triple H then announced that Cena would face Ambrose at the pay-per-view, with the winner facing Rollins later in the night in a Hell in a Cell match. On the October 10 edition of SmackDown, during the Miz TV segment, it was announced by The Miz that the match will be a No Holds Barred Contract on a Pole match. On the October 13 episode of Raw, Triple H announced that the Cena–Ambrose match would take place on Raw in the main event and the winner would face Rollins. Later in the show, Orton was granted by Triple H a match against the loser of the Contract on a Pole match, also taking place in a Hell in a Cell match at the event. Ambrose went on to win the match against Cena, thus setting up Ambrose vs. Rollins and Cena vs. Orton. On the October 20 episode of Raw, Triple H announced that the match between Cena and Orton would be a number one contender match for the WWE World Heavyweight Title.
At SummerSlam, Nikki Bella attacked Brie Bella during her match against Stephanie McMahon. On the October 13 episode of Raw, during a WWE.com exclusive, Nikki interrupted Brie's interview with the news that they will face off at the event, concluding that the loser of the match would become the winner's personal assistant for one month. However, if the loser fails to perform those duties, she will be terminated from the WWE.
Since losing the Intercontinental Championship back to Dolph Ziggler, The Miz began feuding with United States Champion Sheamus after several tag matches with his "stunt double" "Damien Mizdow" against Sheamus and Ziggler. On the October 6 edition of Raw, The Miz defeated Sheamus due to interference by Damien Mizdow. On the October 13 edition of Raw, The Miz defeated Sheamus via count–out. On October 14, it was announced on WWE.com that Sheamus would defend the title against Miz at the event.
On the September 26 edition of SmackDown, Big Show defeated Rusev by disqualification after Rusev hit Big Show with a Russian flag. On the September 29 edition of Raw, Big Show attacked Rusev and tore down a Russian flag. On the October 3 edition of Smackdown, Rusev attacked Big Show. On the October 13 edition of Raw, Rusev defeated Big Show by disqualification after Mark Henry attacked Rusev. On October 14, it was announced on WWE.com that Big Show would face Rusev at Hell in a Cell.
At Night of Champions, AJ Lee defeated Paige to win the Divas Championship in a triple threat match that also included Nikki Bella. On the September 29 edition of Raw, Paige and Alicia Fox attacked AJ after Fox defeated AJ. On the October 6 edition of Raw, Paige and Fox defeated AJ and Emma. On the October 10 edition of SmackDown, AJ defeated Fox, after which AJ and Paige attacked each other. On the October 13 edition of Raw, AJ and Layla defeated Paige and Fox. On the October 17 edition of SmackDown, AJ defeated Layla, after which Paige attacked AJ. On October 20, it was announced on WWE.com that AJ would defend the title against Paige at Hell in a Cell.
At Night of Champions, Gold and Stardust defeated The Usos to win the WWE Tag Team Championship. On the September 26 edition of SmackDown, The Usos defeated Gold and Stardust via disqualification in a rematch for the tag title. In the following weeks, the two teams clashed in six-man tag team matches, which The Usos won. On October 20, it was announced on WWE.com that Gold and Stardust would defend the title against The Usos at Hell in a Cell.
On the September 22 edition of Raw, Dolph Ziggler defeated The Miz to win the Intercontinental Championship. On the September 26 edition of SmackDown, Cesaro won an Intercontinental Championship number one contender battle royal to face the champion later in the night. Later in the night, Ziggler defeated Cesaro, but Cesaro was holding the bottom rope and the referee didn't see it. On the September 29 edition of Raw, Ziggler successfully defended the title in a triple threat match against The Miz and Cesaro. On the October 20 episode of Raw, Cesaro defeated Ziggler in a non title match. On the October 24 episode of Smackdown, Ziggler successfully defended the title against Cesaro. Later in the night, it was announced that Ziggler would defend the title against Cesaro in a 2-out-of-3 falls match at the event.
The pre-show featured a special broadcast of "Mizdow TV" with The Miz as the special guest.
The pre-show featured an segment of "Mizdow TV", hosted by Damien Mizdow with The Miz as the special guest. The pre-show was broadcast on the WWE Network, the WWE app, YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Google+, Pheed and Pinterest. Mizdow asked Miz what are his chances of winning the WWE United States Championship later in the night. Sheamus appeared on the TitanTron and said that Miz would eat a Brogue Kick instead.
Next on the pre-show was a backstage segment. Paige was interviewed by Byron Saxton and she stated that AJ Lee tore her heart and threw it in the dustbin. She vowed to steal AJ's "best friend": the WWE Divas Championship.
Immediately afterwards Mark Henry defeated Bo Dallas, who for one night only changed his name to "Bo Washington" because of his displeasure with the city of Dallas. After the match, Bo Washington said he wasn't ready for his match. Henry rammed him in the barricade before departing the ring
The analysis team was hosted by Renee Young and consisted of Alex Riley, Booker T and special guest Paul Heyman.
The English commentators were Michael Cole, Jerry Lawler and John "Bradshaw" Layfield while there also Spanish and German commentators ringside. Lilian Garcia and Eden Stiles handled ring introductions.
Three backstage segments were featured. The first centred around The Authority, with Triple H and Stephanie McMahon telling Randy Orton to finish John Cena. Orton did not want Seth Rollins interfering. The second centered around the Bella Twins. Brie Bella was packing luggage in a car when Nikki Bella asked for her smoothie. Nikki poured the smoothie on Brie and asked to get another. The third featured Dean Ambrose talking about Halloween and Seth Rollins.
The first match to open the show was Dolph Ziggler defending his WWE Intercontinental Championship against Cesaro in a two out of three falls match. Ziggler got the first pin after rolling up Cesaro. Immediately following this, Cesaro turned ruthless and constantly began attacking Ziggler. Cesaro executed an uppercut on Ziggler but only claimed a nearfall, while the latter executed his Famouser but got another nearfall as well. Ziggler finally got the win after executing a Zig-Zag, thus winning the match (2 falls to 0) and retaining the title.
The second match was Nikki Bella taking on Brie Bella. Nikki executed a Rack Attack on Brie in the first half of the match, but only a 2 count was rendered, which infuriated Nikki. Brie managed to apply the Yes Lock on her sister but managed to reach the ropes. Nikki finally claimed the victory with a second Rack Attack, making Brie her personal assistant for 30 days. However, if Brie does not comply, she will be forced to quit WWE.
The third match of the night saw Gold and Stardust defend the WWE Tag Team Championships against The Usos. Goldust claimed the victory for his team after he executed a Final Cut on Jey Uso for the pin.
The fourth match was John Cena taking on Randy Orton for a future shot at the WWE World Heavyweight Championship . It was contested in Hell in a Cell and was their second encounter inside. Cena and Orton began fighting ringside before Orton sent face first in the wall of the Cell. Orton wedged a chair one side of the rings corner, afterwards Cena returned to the ring and attempted an AA. Cena responded by sending Orton at the steel steps. Cena brought a table in the middle of the ring while Orton attacked Cena with the table and propped in the corner of the ring. Orton executed his RKO on Cena at but only a 2 count was rendered. Orton called for another RKO but Cena tried another AA attempt. Orton attacked Cena with a low-blow, but Cena responded with an STF. Cena finally executed two AA's but Orton kicked out of both. Cena finally got the win after he executed another AA from the second rope through a table. After the match, Cena walked to the timekeepers area toward Heyman, who was on the preshow panel, and proclaimed that he will slay the Beast (Brock Lesnar)
The fifth match saw Sheamus defending the WWE United States Championship against The Miz. Damien Mizdow mimicked attacks and defences throughout the match. At one point, The Miz executed his Skull Crushing Finale, but secured a two count only. Sheamus won the match after executing a Brogue Kick. After the match, Sheamus began to play with The Miz like a rag doll while Mizdow mimicked all his actions which amused the audience. Sheamus ended up executing another Brogue Kick to Miz.
The sixth match was Big Show taking on Rusev. At the climax of the match, Mark Henry came down to support his friend. Rusev won after applying the Accolade once again to Big Show, who submitted.
The seventh match was AJ Lee defending the WWE Divas Championship against Paige. AJ got the win after applying the Black Widow. Paige then attacked Alicia Fox by slapping her, telling that it was her fault, and saying that she hates her.
The main event saw Dean Ambrose take on Seth Rollins. Ambrose climbed the cell before the match began, and Jamie Noble and Joey Mercury emerged and tried to coax him down. Mercury and Noble climbed the cell but Ambrose attacked them with kendo sticks, allowing Rollins to climb the cell and attack Ambrose. Both attacked each other until they fell off the side of the cage and through the announce tables (similar to Mick Foley's famous 1998 incident). Both were placed onto stretchers until Ambrose woke up and attacked Rollins. The match officially started when both participants entered the cell. Ambrose took out a chair from under the ring and sat on it while taunting Rollins and berating him for his betrayal. Ambrose tried to put Rollins through cinder blocks but Rollins avoided it. Kane showed up and sprayed a fire extinguisher at Ambrose through the cell. Rollins executed his signature curb stomp on Ambrose, but Ambrose kicked out. Just as Ambrose was about to defeat Rollins with a curb stomp of his own, the arena lights cut out and Bray Wyatt's trademark lantern appeared in the middle of the ring, spraying out smoke and projecting an image of a ghostly specter while the sound of Wyatt reciting an incantation was heard. Wyatt emerged from the smoke and executed a Uranage Slam on Ambrose, who was then pinned by Rollins for the victory. After the match, Wyatt executed a Sister Abigail on Ambrose and laughed maniacally until the show ended.
The event received generally positive reviews. James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch rated the Bella match and the Divas championship match between AJ Lee and Paige with 2 stars each, saying that Brie Bella's loss "[made] the babyface seem weak", while calling the Divas championship match a "solid match", but at the same time asking "Now, where do they go with A.J. and Paige after putting an end to their game of hot potato with the title?", referring to the title changes that the two exchanged at SummerSlam and Night of Champions. Caldwell didn't rate the Rollins vs. Ambrose match, stating that it was a "chaotic match fitting the feud", but with "a questionable TV-style finish to a main event.
The next night on Raw, Big Show and Mark Henry faced Gold and Stardust for the WWE Tag Team Championships. Henry turned heel when an argument ensued between him and Show when he executed the World's Strongest Slam on Show, thus costing themselves the match. Following the match, Henry executed three World's Strongest Slams on Show. On the November 3 edition of Raw, Henry and Show faced each other which Show won by disqualification after Henry hit him with a chair. The two continued the feud as both of them are on opposing teams of Team Cena/Team Authority at Survivor Series (Show on Team Cena, Henry on Team Authority) which was won by Team Cena.
Randy Orton, who was Curb Stomped by Seth Rollins on the Raw prior to Hell in a Cell, managed to get his retribution the next week. Orton turned face after he attacked Rollins with an RKO. In the process, he was no longer associated with the villainous stable The Authority. On the November 3 edition of Raw. Orton lost to Rollins in the main event. Orton was eventually attacked by fellow Authority member Kane, injuring him (Kayfabe) and leaving to bleed. This was done so Orton could take leave to begin production on The Condemned 2: Desert Prey.
Meanwhile, due to The Authority unhappy following John Cena's win to earn another shot at the WWE World Heavyweight Championship, Triple H challenged a team captained by Cena (including himself) to a traditional Survivor Series elimination match against The Authority. Later that night, Cena faced Rollins in the main event. Cena won by disqualification after Kane got involved. This triggered a massive brawl involving the entire locker room. Cena still stood tall at the end of the night.
List of WWE Network events
List of WWE pay-per-view events
