The Mexico women's national football team (sometimes referred to as Las Tri) represents Mexico in international women's football competition and is controlled by La Federación Mexicana de Fútbol (Mexico Football Federation). In the 1970s, the team gained popularity, with Mexico finishing 3rd in an unofficial Women's World Cup held in Italy. Also, in 1971, the team hosted an unofficial women's World Cup reaching the final, only to lose to Denmark 3–0. An estimated 110,000 people attended the final at Estadio Azteca that day. The team was formed before the 1999 Women's World Cup and was composed of players having citizenship of Mexico and descedents born elsewhere of Mexico's citizens. The main goal for the team was to qualify for their first World Cup. The team has since then developed and is now ranked 25th in the Women's FIFA World Ranking. One disadvantage of the team as compared to all other teams is that they have had for the past 14 years, one coach, Leonardo Cuéllar; rare in the world of a national team from Mexico. Another resurgence in popularity is developing, as the U-20 team competed in the quarter-finals in 2010 FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup and a notable 1–0 win over England where the game was broadcast live. The team was the host for the 2010 CONCACAF Women's Gold Cup, finishing in second place after an unexpected 2–1 victory over the United States. Mexico has a professional league, the Super Liga Femenil de Futbol, which was established in part to raise consciousness of women's football in Mexico.
The first official coach for the Mexico women's national football team was Leonardo Cuéllar. One of his main goals when first establishing the team was to qualify for the 1999 Women's World Cup. The team accomplished this by placing second to the Canadian team in the 1998 CONCACAF Women's Championship. After finding a coach to begin the team, controversy soon began regarding the nationality of the players being recruited. Many people in Mexico argued that Mexican-American girls should not be allowed to play on the team because they were taking spots away from full citizens. The team captain, Andrea Rodebaugh, argued that the team's main goal was to qualify and said that to them it did not matter who was on the team as long as the team was formed. The national team was formed despite the controversy and consisted of players holding Mexican citizenship as well as players from the United States. Initially the language disparity between the Spanish-speaking Mexicans and English-speaking Americans created a lack of cohesion in the team, but the teammates began teaching each other their respective languages.
In recent years, an increase in young talent developing in Mexico brought an increase of expectations from Mexican football fans and media alike. Following their worst ever World Cup finish in 2015, fans began calling for Cuellar's resignation or firing. In 2016, the women's national football team failed to qualify for the Olympics, and lost to Costa Rica which was the turning point in the teams history since many thought the defeat resulted in Mexico becoming the fourth best team in CONCACAF. With these results and Leonardo Cuellar's controversial decision to not bring Charlyn Corral and Kenti Robles, whom had terrific seasons at their clubs in Spain, onto the squad led to him resigning from his position. The Mexican Federation is still trying to find a successor to Leonardo Cuellar, who was the only coach of the team for 18 years.
The Mexico national team utilizes a tricolour system, composed of the colors green, white and red. The team's three colors originated from Mexico's national flag, known as the tricolor. The kit being used 2011–2012 is a green jersey for home and a black with gold jersey for away. Sewn on the inside collar of both jerseys is the Mexican saying somos guerreros meaning "we are warriors".
The following is a list of matches played or games scheduled from February 2015:
Squad for the 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup.
Head coach: Leonardo Cuéllar
List of players called up to the squad in the last 12 months    
*Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks.
*Draws include knockout matches decided on penalty kicks.
