Tochigi (栃木市, Tochigi-shi) is a city located in Tochigi Prefecture, in the northern Kantō region of Japan. As of May 2015, the city had an estimated population of 159,648 and a population density of 482 persons per km². Its total area was 331.50 square kilometres (127.99 sq mi). Because the city escaped war damage during World War II, many historical temples, traditional shops and kura (Japanese traditional storehouses) remain in the city center. The city was awarded the "Utsukushii-machinami Taisho" prize from the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism in 2009.
Tochigi is located in the very southern portion of Tochigi Prefecture, bordering on Ibaraki Prefecture and Gunma Prefecture to the southwest. In the southern part of the city the Yanaka Reservoir, which is in the Watarase flood control area, is used for sailboating and windsurfing. It was designated a Ramsar Site in June 2012.
Tochigi Prefecture
Oyama
Shimotsuke
Kanuma
Sano
Mibu
Nogi
Ibaraki Prefecture
Koga
Gunma Prefecture
Itakura
In the Edo period Tochigi prospered from its location on the Uzumagawa River, which connected with the Tone River to Edo. Envoys using the Reiheishi Way sent from the Imperial Court going to Shrines and Temples of Nikkō stayed at the lodging area in the city. Most the area was formerly tenryo territory controlled directly by the Tokugawa shogunate; however, the minor feudal domain of Fukiake Domain was located within the borders of modern city of Tochigi.
Following the Meiji restoration and the creation of Tochigi Prefecture, Tochigi Town was the prefectural capital from 1871 until its relocation to Utsunomiya in 1884. On April 1, 1937 Tochigi was elevated to city status.
On September 30, 1954 Tochigi absorbed the villages of Ōmiya, Minagawa, Fukiage and Terao (all from Shimotsuga District). This was followed by the village of Kōō (from Shimotsuga District) on March 31, 1957. Tochigi hosted its first film festival, the Kuranomachikado, or, "Eizo Film Festival" from 5 October 2007 to 8 October 2007. On March 29, 2010, Tochigi absorbed the towns of Fujioka, Ōhira and Tsuga (Shimotsuga District). This was followed by the town of Nishikata (from Kamitsuga District) on October 1, 2011 and the town of Iwafune (from Shimotsuga District) on April 5, 2014.
Tochigi city is a regional commercial center, and has a mixed local economy. Food processing, automotive parts and light manufacturing dominated the industrial sector. Isuzu has maintained a factory since 1961. In 2010, the city ranked first in the number of farming families in the prefecture.
Kokugakuin Tochigi Junior College
Tochigi also has 31 primary schools, 15 middle schools and eight high schools.
JR East – Ryōmō Line
Tochigi - Ōhirashita - Iwafune
Tobu Railway – Tobu Nikko Line
Fujioka - Shizuwa - Shin-Ōhirashita - Tochigi - Shin-Tochigi - Kassemba - Ienaka - Tōbu Kanasaki
Tobu Railway – Tobu Utsunomiya Line
Shin-Tochigi - Yashū-Hirakawa - Yashū-Ōtsuka
Tōhoku Expressway – Sano-Fujioka IC, Iwafune JCT, Tochigi IC, Tochigi-Tsuga JCT, Tsuga-Nishikata PA
Kita-Kantō Expressway – Iwafune JCT, Tochigi-Tsuga JCT, Tsuga IC
Japan National Route 50
Japan National Route 293
the sound of Tree frogs in Ajisai-zaka, Mount Ohirasan in Tochigi have been designated as one of the 100 Soundscapes of Japan by the Ministry of the Environment 
Namihei Odaira – founder of Hitachi
Yūzō Yamamoto – author
Tanaka Isson – artist
Toyo Shibata – poet
Tomoko Yamaguchi – actress
Toshio Furukawa – voice actor 
Yuriko Handa – Olympic volleyball athlete 
Hirokazu Sawamura – professional baseball player
Takayuki Terauchi – professional baseball player
Takuya Takei – professional football player
Shingo Tomita – professional football player
Koji Hachisuka – professional football player
Toshiaki Kawada – professional wrestler
Ryoji Isaoka – Olympic weightlifter 
Tochigiyama Moriya – sumo wrestler
