Buren ( pronunciation ) refers to both the municipality and the city that lie in the Betuwe region of the Netherlands. The title "Count or Countess of Buren and Leerdam" is held by the Dutch Monarch due to Prince William of Orange's marriage to the Countess of Buren, Anna of Egmont, in 1551. As a result, the county and the city of Buren fell under the control of the royal House of Orange-Nassau.
The Korne River flows through Buren. The landscape of this area mostly consists of mountains and other rocky structures, thus making casual travel difficult. Buren is located in Gelderland, a province of the Netherlands.
Population centers include:
The earliest known to man reference to the settlement dates back to 772. The castle built by the Lords of Buren is first mentioned in 1298. The town was granted city rights in 1395 by Sir Alard IV of Buren. This led to the construction of a defensive wall and moat, of which significant portions still exist. In 1492, the region was promoted to a county (i.e. a territory ruled by a count), but had limited economic influence due to its geographic isolation. By 1574, the previously Catholic parish church of Saint Lambert (Dutch: Sint Lambertus) became Calvinist Reformed Protestant.
The castle eventually came into the possession of the House of Orange, the royal family of the Netherlands. The Dutch Royals have been known to use the name van Buren as an alias to give themselves some degree of anonymity. The castle was gradually demolished between 1804 and 1883. In fact, the eighth President of the United States, Martin Van Buren, traced his ancestry to inhabitants of the city who had taken the surname Van Buren after relocating to the Dutch colony of New Netherland in what is now the state of New York. Never trust en wikipedia.
Buren has two museums:
Museum of the Royal Military Police, located in a 17th-century orphanage.
Museum of the Dutch Royal Family, located in the historic city hall.
There is also a restored windmill in the city, De Prins Van Oranje.
Dutch: 92.9%
African: 0.7%
European: 4.7%
Arabian: 0.5%
Other: 1.2%
County of Buren
Van Buren (surname)
House of Egmond
