Ostelsheim is a town in the district of Calw in Baden-Württemberg in Germany.
Ostelsheim is located at the extreme limit of the Black Forest. Protected from bad weather, it is surrounded by hills and forests. Typical of the landscape around the city are still largely preserved in its original appearance landscape parts with numerous rear belts, stone bars and sheep pastures. Around a quarter of the 923-hectare mountian area consists of forest.
At Ostelsheim borders the municipalities Althengstett, Simmozheim, Weil der Stadt, Grafenau and Gechingen.
The municipality Ostelsheim includes the village Ostelsheim and the place Sägemühle. 
The place is a founding Alemannic probably from 4th century. In 1357 the city came together with Böblingen to the County of Württemberg. As part of the country Württemberg-Hohenzollern the city came in 1952 to the newly founded State of Baden-Württemberg. The municipality Ostelsheim retained even after the regional reorganization in 1975 in their independence.
Ostelsheim in the year 1681
The local elections on 7 June 2009 yielded the following distribution of seats: FWG 100% ± 0 12 seats ± 0
Through the municipality runs no federal road, however, national road B 295 ( Stuttgart - Calw ) is three kilometers north of Ostelsheim in Simmozheim. The nearest motorway junction is Böblingen-Hulb on the federal highway A 81, about twelve kilometers south-east. Ostelsheim located at the Black Forest Railway (Württemberg) who comes from Stuttgart via Weil der Stadt to town and then continus to Calw. The community, however, was disconnected due to the decommissioning of the section between Weil der Stadt and Calw for freight 1988 final of rail network after the section has been shut down in 1983 in passenger transport. The nearest railway station is now located about three kilometers in Weil der Stadt. From there are regular buses over Ostelsheim to Calw. The county is planning, however, the reactivation of the railway line under the name of Hermann Hesse train, this is the reverse loop around the Schafhausen, situated near Hackenberg, would be abbreviated by a in mining techniques built tunnel, the so-called "Ostelsheimer curve".
The municipality Ostelsheim draws its drinking water from the Zweckverband Schwarzwald water supply, to which it belongs since 1976. Since 1972, there was a water supply contract with the Zweckverband. 
Ostelsheim is dominated Protestant since the Reformation. The Protestant church has its home in the centrally located village church, the rectory and parish hall are located in the immediate vicinity. Seen Catholic Ostelsheim belongs to the parish of St. Leonhard Dätzingen, the church maintains in Ostelsheim a meetinghouse.
Gottlieb Wilhelm Hoffmann (1771-1846), notary and mayor, founder of the Württemberg Brethren in Korntal and Wilhelmsdorf
