Ahvaz (Persian: اهواز Ahvāz‎‎, Khuzestani Arabic: أهواز Aẖwaz) is a city in the southwest of Iran. At the 2011 census, its population was 1,112,021 and its built-up (or metro) area with Sheybany was home to 1,136,989 inhabitants. Ahvaz has the world's worst air pollution according to a survey by the World Health Organization in 2011.
Ahvaz is built on the banks of the Karun River and is situated in the middle of Khuzestan Province, of which it is the capital and most populous city. The city has an average elevation of 20 meters above sea level.
The word Ahvaz is a Persianized form, which in turn itself is derived from a Persian word. The Dehkhoda Dictionary specifically defines the "Suq-al-Ahvaz" as "Market of the Khuzis", where "Suq" is the elamite word for market, and "Ahvaz" is a broken plural (اسم جمع) of the form "af'āl" (افعال) of the word "Huz", which itself comes from the Persian Huz, from Achaemenid inscriptions where the term first appears. Thus, "Ahvaz" in Persian means "the Huz-i people", which refers to the non-Arabic original inhabitants of Khūzestān.
The name of the region appears in medieval Syriac sources as ܒܝܬ ܗܘܙܝܐ Beṯ Huzáyé, literally meaning "land of the Huzis".
The term "Huz", meanwhile, is the Old Persian rendition of Suz (Susa-Susiana), the native Elamite name of the region. See Origin of the name Khuzestan and Elam#Etymology for more details.
Ahvaz is the analog of "Avaz" and "Avaja" which appear in Darius's epigraph. This word appears in Naqsh-Rostam inscription as "Khaja" or "Khooja" too.
First named Ōhrmazd-Ardašēr (Persian: هرمزداردشیر Hormizdartazir) it was built near the beginning of the Sassanid dynasty on what historians believe to have been the site of the old city of Taryana, a notable city under the Persian Achaemenid dynasty, or the city of Aginis referred to in Greek sources  where Nearchus and his fleet entered the Pafitigris.. It was founded either by Ardashir I in 230 (cf. Encyclopædia Iranica, al-Muqaddasi, et al.) or (according to the Middle Persian Šahrestānīhā ī Ērānšahr) by his grandson Hormizd I; the town's name either combined Ardashir's name with the Zoroastrian name for God, Ōhrmazd or Hormizd's name with that of his grandfather. It became the seat of the province, and was also referred to as Hūmšēr. During the Sassanid era, an irrigation system and several dams were constructed, and the city prospered. Examples of Sassanid-era dams are Band-e Bala-rud, Band-e Mizan, Band-e Borj Ayar and Band-e Khak. The city replaced Susa, the ancient capital of Susiana, as the capital of what was then called Khuzestān.
The city had two sections; the nobles of the city lived in one part while the other was inhabited by merchants. When the Arabs invaded the area in 640, the part of the city home to the nobility was demolished but the Hūj-ī-stānwāčār "Market of Khūz State", the merchant area, remained intact. The city was therefore renamed Sūq al-Ahwāz, "Market of the Khuz", a semi-literal translation of the Persian name of this quarter - Ahwāz being the Arabic broken plural of Hûz, taken from the ancient Persian term for the native Elamite peoples, Hūja (remaining in medieval khūzīg "of the Khuzh" and modern Khuzestān "Khuz State", as noted by Dehkhoda dictionary.
During the Umayyad and Abbasid eras, Ahvaz flourished as a center for the cultivation of sugarcane and as the home of many well-known scholars. It is discussed by such respected medieval historians and geographers as ibn Hawqal, Tabari, Istakhri, al-Muqaddasi, Ya'qubi, Masudi, and Mostowfi Qazvini. Nearby stood the Academy of Gundishapur, where the modern-day teaching hospital is said to have been first established.
Ahvaz was devastated in the bloody Mongol invasions of the 13th and 14th centuries and subsequently declined into a mere village. The dam and irrigation channels, no longer maintained, eroded and finally collapsed early in the 19th century. During this time Ahvaz was primarily inhabited by the original Khuzhis (Persians) and a small number of Sabians. Although most Arab migrants fled the city, a few stayed. Some minor cultivation continued, while all evidence of sugarcane plantations is still going on in Haft Teppe area in north of Ahvaz, although ruins of sugarcane mills from the medieval era remained in existence. Several ruins of water mills also still remain in Shoush and Shoushtar.
The seat of the province has, for the most of its history, been in the northern reaches of the land, first at Susa (Shush) and then at Shushtar. During a short spell in the Sasanian era, the capital of the province was moved to its geographical center, where the river town of Hormuz-Ardashir (modern Ahvaz). However, later in the Sasanian time and throughout the Islamic era, the provincial seat returned and stayed at Shushtar, until the late Qajar period. With the increase in the international sea commerce arriving on the shores of Khuzestan, Ahvaz became a more suitable location for the provincial capital. The River Karun is navigable all the way to Ahvaz (above which, the Karun flows through rapids). The town was thus refurbished by the order of the Qajar king, Naser al-Din Shah and renamed after him, Nâseri. Shushtar quickly declined, while Ahvaz/Nâseri prospered to the present day.
In the 19th century, "Ahvaz was no more than a small borough inhabited mainly by Sabeans (1,500 to 2,000 inhabitants according to Ainsworth in 1835; 700 according to Curzon in 1890)."
In the 1880s, under Qajar rule, the Karun River was dredged and re-opened to commerce. A newly built railway crossed the Karun at Ahvaz. The city again became a commercial crossroads, linking river and rail traffic. The construction of the Suez Canal further stimulated trade. A port city was built near the old village of Ahvaz, and named Bandar-e-Naseri in honor of Nassereddin Shah Qajar.
Oil was found near Ahvaz in the early 20th century, and the city once again grew and prospered as a result of this new found wealth. From 1897-1925, the city of Ahvaz was in the hands of heshmatoddoleh Ghajar, whom acted as governor and Sarhang Reza Gholi Khane Arghoon as commander of Ghajari's army based in Khuzestan. Khaz'al Khan/Sheikh Khaz'al was appointed by Mozaffareddin shah in Khorramshahr, Sardar Asad Bakhtiari as the most powerful leader of Khuzestan's Bakhtiaries. He had power and authority over most regions of Khuzestan, such as Dezful, Shushtar, Izeh, even Ahvaz and Amir mojahede bakhtiari in Ramhormoz and Behbahan. At this time, the newly founded Ahvaz was named Nâseri in honour to its founder Nassereddin Shah Qajar. Afterwards, during the Pahlavi period, it resumed its old name, Ahvaz. The government of the Khūzestān Province was transferred there from Shûshtar in 1926. The trans-Iranian railroad reached Ahvaz in 1929 and by the World War II, Ahvaz had become the principal built-up area of interior of Khūzestān. Professional segregation remained well marked between various groups in that period still feebly integrated: Persians, sub-groupings of Persians and Arabs. Natives of the Isfahan region held an important place in retail trade, owners of cafes and hotels and as craftsmen.
Iraq attempted to annex Khūzestān and Ahvaz in 1980, resulting in the Iran–Iraq War (1980–1988). Ahvaz was close to the front lines and suffered badly during the war.
Iraq had pressed its claims to Khūzestān. Iraq had hoped to exacerbate ethnic tensions and win over popular support for the invaders. Most accounts say that the Iranian Arab inhabitants resisted the Iraqis rather than welcome them as liberators. However, some Iranian Arabs claim that as a minority they face discrimination from the central government; they agitate for the right to preserve their cultural and linguistic distinction and more provincial autonomy. See Politics of Khūzestān.
In 1989, the Foolad Ahvaz steel facility was built close to the town. This company is best known for its company-sponsored football club, Foolad F.C., which was the chart-topper for Iran's Premier Football League in 2005.
In 2005 the city witnessed a series of bomb explosions. Many government sources relate these events to developments in Iraq, accusing foreign governments of organising and funding Arab separatist groups. The Arab Struggle Movement for the Liberation of Ahvaz claimed credit for several of the bombings, including a series of four bombs on 12 June 2005, that killed 8 people.
Ahvaz located 100 km north-east of Abadan and is accessible via following routes in addition of a single runway airport:
Tehran-Khorramshahr national railway
 Ahvaz-Abadan expressway (145 km)
 Ahvaz-Andimeshk (152 km) expressway
 Ahvaz-Bandar Imam Khomeini freeway (175 km).
Ahvaz, being the largest city in the province, consists of two distinctive districts: the newer part of Ahvaz which is the administrative and industrial center, which is built on the right bank of the Karun river while residential areas are found in the old section of the city, on the left bank.
Ahvaz has a desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh) with long, very hot summers and mild, short winters. Ahvaz is consistently one of the hottest cities on the planet during the summer, with summer temperatures regularly at least 45 degrees Celsius, sometimes exceeding 50 degrees Celsius with many sandstorms and duststorms common during the summer period. However, in winters, the minimum temperature can fall to around +5 degrees Celsius. Winters in Ahvaz have no snow. The average annual rainfall is around 230 mm.
In 2011, the World Health Organization ranked Ahvaz as the world's most air-polluted city.
Ahvaz is accessible via freeways from Isfahan and Shiraz, and roadways to Tehran.
A metro urban railway system is being built by the Ahvaz urban railway. It will be a 23 km underground line with 24 stations.
The airport is served by Iran Asseman Airlines (Dubai, Kuwait, Tehran, flying on Boeing 727-200s or Fokker F100s), Caspian Airlines (Dubai, by MD-80), Iran Air (Isfahan, Kuwait, Tehran, by Boeing 727-200 or Fokker 100), Iran Air Tours (Isfahan, Mashad, Shiraz, Tehran, by MD-80), Kish Air (Tehran, by MD-80), Saha Air (Tehran, by Boeing 707-300) and Turkish Airlines (Istanbul, by A320).
Traditionally, Khuzestan province has been a major soccer hub in Iran. The city has two existing sport complexes: Takhti Stadium and the newly constructed Ghadir Stadium. There are several other smaller complexes for martial arts, swimming pools and gymnasiums. Also, a new privately owned stadium is currently under construction by Foolad F.C. in Ahvaz.
Football is a major part of the city's culture. The abundant enthusiasm has made Ahvaz home to three Iranian major Football clubs: Foolad, Esteghlal Khuzestan are currently playing in the Persian Gulf Pro League, and Esteghlal Ahvaz is playing in Azadegan League.
Foolad have won the league on two occasions, the 2013–2014 season and the 2004–2005 season. Esteghlal Ahvaz finished runners–up in the league in the 2006–2007 season.
A number of other teams such as Foolad B the second team of Foolad and Karun Khuzestan play in the 2nd Division.
Ahvaz has also two teams in the Iranian Futsal Super League, which are Sherkat Melli Haffari Iran FSC and Gaz Khozestan FSC.
Ahvaz is also known for its universities as well as its role in commerce and industry. Ahvaz institutes of higher learning include:
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences
Petroleum University of Technology
Shahid Chamran University of Ahvaz
Islamic Azad University of Ahvaz
Ancient:
Nobakhte Zartoshti Ahwazi, Scholar
Abu Sahl son of Nobakht, Scholar, head of Baghdad library which was stocked by Gondishapour books
Ibn Heisam Majoosi Ahwazi, Scientist, mathematician, astronomer, engineer
Abolhasan Majoosi Ahwazi, Scientist, mathematician, astronomer
Zadan Farrokh Majoosi Ahwazi Head of the ancient Baghdad accounting court (Divan)
Ali ibn Abbas Majoosi Ahwazi Doctor of Medicine, Professor in the ancient Gondishapour University.
Chahar Bakhte Majoosi Doctor of Medicine, advanced pharmacist
Abu Yaghub Ibn Isa Doctor of Medicine, Professor in the ancient Gondishapour University
Abu Yahya Ibn Tarigh Doctor of Medicine, Professor in the ancient Gondishapour University
Abu Shahpour Head and Professor of the ancient Ahvaz Grand Hospital and Medical School
Great Bakhtishoo Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Jorjis Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Bakhtishoo The Second Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Jorjis 2nd Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Bakhtishoo 3rd Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Obeidollah 1st Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Michael Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Yahya Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Gabriel 2nd Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Bakhtishoo 4th Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Abu Saeed Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Sahl Ibn Shahpour Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour. He migrated to Baghdad.
Ibn Masuie Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour, scholar, translator.
Helal Ahvazi Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Ibn Masuye Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Ahvazie Monshi Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Ibn Yazdad Ahwazi Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Fazl Nobakhte Ahwazi Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Ramhormozi Doctor of Medicine in ancient Gondishapour
Abu Nuwas Ibn Majoosi, poet
Contemporary:
Kianoosh Aiyari, well-known Iranian film director
Amir Taheri, Iranian conservative author
Ahmad Mahmoud, Persian novelist
Ali Shamkhani, Iranian Minister of Defense (1997–2005)
Alwan Alshowaya, a local singer from villages in close proximity to Ahvaz, and the inventor of the Arabic singing style “ Alwanie”, which was named after him.
Amirreza Amirbakhtiar, political activist
Babak Rezazadeh, producer/sound engineer
Belal Taheri, first Iranian who was elected in IVU, independent filmmaker and distributor, human rights activist
Ezzat Negahban, patriarch of modern Iranian archaeology
Hamed Haddadi, NBA basketball player
Hamid Dabashi, intellectual historian, cultural and literary critic
Hamid Zangeneh, economist, author, and activist
Hossein Kaebi, national football player
Jalal Kameli Mofrad, national football player
Jamal Mayahi, marine engineer, oil tankers, shipping expert and advisor
Khaz'al al-Ka'bi al- Tahami, the ruler of the "Mohammara(Khorramshahr)" appointed by Mozaffareddin Shah Ghajar
Ali Hashemi, general and commander in the Iran–Iraq War
Malileh Farshid, architect
Maryam Heydari, poet
Mehdi Yarahi, an Arabic and Persian singer
Mehrangiz Kar, human rights activist
Mohammad Hossein Adeli, Iranian Economist and Diplomat
Mohammad Mousavi, ney soloist
Mohammad-Reza Eskandari, Iran's former minister of Agriculture
Muhammad ibn Falah, theologian
Parviz Abnar, Iranian Sound recordist
Patrick Monahan, British comedian
Manuchehr Shahrokhi, Professor of Finance, California State University; Editor, Global Finance Journal; Executive Director, Global Finance Association-Conference
Reza Rezazadeh, video producer/director
Sousan S. Altaie, PhD Scientific Policy Advisor, OIVD CDRH, FDA
Parviz Perez Talebzadeh, scholar, Professor of English Literature, translator, Executive Director of Toutiya Development & Investment Company, Financing & Trade Contracts Consultant for the Iranian Ministry of Energy
History of Iran
Elam
Gundeshapur
Khūzestān Province
Mandaeism, Mandaic language
Politics of Khūzestān
Susa
Takhti Stadium (Ahvaz)
Choqa Zanbil
