Dewas District (Hindi: देवास ज़िला) is a district of Madhya Pradesh state in central India. The town of Dewas is the district headquarters.
Dewas District roughly corresponds to the territories of the twin princely states of Dewas. The district straddles the Vindhya Range; the northern portion of the district lies on the Malwa plateau, while the southern portion lies in the valley of the Narmada River. The Narmada forms the southern boundary of the district. The district is bounded to the east by Sehore District, to the south by the Harda and Khandwa districts, to the west by the Khargone and Indore districts, and to the north by the Ujjain and Shajapur districts. Dewas District is part of Ujjain Division. Devsaal Rawats of Uttarakhand are said to have their origins in Dewas at the time of legendary king Vikramāditya.
Dewas District is now divided into six tehsils namely Sonkatch, Dewas, Bagli, Kannod, Tonk Khurd and Khategaon. Dewas tehsil is situated on the north-western part of the district, Sonkatch on the north-eastern part, Bagli on the south, Kannod on the south-central part and Khategaon on the South-east. Dewas, the headquarters of Dewas tehsil, which is also the district headquarters, is situated on National Highway No. 3 and is also connected by broad-gauge railway line of western Railway.
According to the 2011 census Dewas District has a population of 1,563,107, roughly equal to the nation of Gabon or the US state of Hawaii. This gives it a ranking of 319th in India (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of 223 inhabitants per square kilometre (580/sq mi) . Its population growth rate over the decade 2001-2011 was 19.48%. Dewas has a sex ratio of 941 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 70.53%.
Languages spoken include Hindi, Maalvi, Bangla, English and Bareli Rathwi, a Bhil language with approximately 64 000 speakers.
Popular Shri Digambar Jain Teerth Kshetra, Pushpagiri is located 4 km westerly to Sonkatch in a truly peaceful environs of Songiri Hills. The temple here is dedicated to Lord Mahavir.
Kheoni or Khinvi wildlife Sanctuary was established in the year 1955. The area of reserved forest is 115.320 sqkm and of protected forest is 16.678 sqkm and totalling to 132.778 sqkm. This sanctuary houses different types of animals, birds, aquatic and lush greenery throughout. There are around 1 Lion, 8 Leopards, 70 Sambhar, 275 Cheetal, 163 Neelgay, 45 Chinkara and 75 Bhhendki according to 1999 census. There is a forest guesthouse in Kheoni village.
This pahaad situated next to Potla and Pipri villages in Bagli Taluk, Dewas district is a series of small rocky mountains. There are total seven mountain-like formations of geographically shaped interlocking basalt columns that are probably created simultaneously as a result of volcanic eruption millions of years ago. These rock columns are arranged in a pattern that gives an appearance of a man made structure. Most of the columns are hexagonal and interlocked with similar rocks on all the edges that emit a musical sound when struck. Most visible columns are 8 to 10 feet long but there can be longer rocks further deep inside the mountain. Although basalt columns are not unique and are found at several places around the world (including St. Mary's Islands in Karnataka, India), the Quality, Quantity, Geometrical arrangement and Geographical location (far away from ocean) of this place is unique.
Situated on the Indore-Nemawar [Road NH 59A], Gidya Khoh or Gidiya Khoh is a picturesque place in the Dewas District. The place has a spectacular waterfall surrounded by an beautiful green valley. Water fall cascades down from a height of 500–600 ft. Khudel devta temple located here is much revered by the local tribes. Gidya Khoh is located about 48 km southerly Dewas and 42 km easterly to Indore, and Double Chwki is the nearest junction from where Gidya Khoh is 9 km far [Double Chowki >4kms> Shivni >1kms> Janakpur >3kms> Bhadkiya >1 km> Gidiya Khoh waterfall].
The United Nations awarded Dewas district's community water management works the 3rd place under the category of "Best Water Management Practices" for 2011-2012.
A documentary film made by Public Service Broadcasting Trust about Dewas water revolution was featured on Lok Sabha TV.
