Nabadwip (/ˌnæbəˈdwiːp/) is a city in the Municipality in Nadia district in West Bengal (India), on the western bank of the Bhagirathi river. The Bhagirathi river originally used to flow west of Nabadwip, forming a boundary between the districts of Bardhaman and Nadia. It has now shifted its course, cutting the city off from the rest of the Nadia district. Reputedly founded in 1063, the town served as the old capital of the Sena dynasty. It was a center of learning and philosophy in medieval India and is still noted for its traditional Sanskrit schools. The Navya Nyaya school of logic reached its peak under the philosophers of Nabadwip. The great Vaishnava saint, social reformer and an important figure of the Bhakti movement, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (1486–1533) was born here, making this place an important pilgrimage centre in Bengal. Many devotees from worldwide who adhere to Gaudiya Vaishnavism come to Nabadwip for pilgrimage on the auspicious occasion of the Birthday celebration of Shri Mahaprabhu on the Phalguni Purnima (i.e. on the Full moon day of the March every year), and for various festivals in relation to Leelas of Shri Mahaprabhu like Sri Nabadwip-mandala Parikrama and other festivities like Dol yatra, Ras purnima Gaura-purnima.
Nabadwip was the capital of Bengal Empire under the reign of Ballal Sen and Lakshman Sen, the famous rulers of the Sena Empire. They ruled Bengal from here in the period from 1159 to 1206. In 1202, Nabadwip was attacked and invaded by Bakhtiyar Khilji who plundered Nabadwip. The Lakshman Sen, the old King, being afraid left the Capital. This victory paved the way for Muslim rule in Bengal. Nabadwip and Nadia were great centres of learning and intellectual prowess. For five centuries, it was referred to as "Oxford of Bengal".
The name 'Nabadwip' derives from "9 islands" in the Bengali. They are namely Antardwip, Simantadwip, Rudradwip, Madhyadwip, Godrumdwip, Ritudwip, Jahnudwip, Modadrumdwip, and Koladwi. But this Navadwip is not the original Navadwip. Original Navadwip is at Nababgonj, Rajshahi District of Bangladesh.
Bablari Dewanganj
Char Brahmanagar
Char Maijdia
Gadigachha
Majdia
Nabadwip and
Tiorkhali
In the 2011 census, Nabadwip Urban Agglomeration had a population of 175,474, out of which 90,810 were males and 84,664 were females. The 0–6 years population was 8,388.In education section, total literates in Nabadwip city are 102,793 of which 55,569 are males while 47,224 are females. Average literacy rate of Nabadwip city is 87.75 percent of which male and female literacy was 91.14 and 84.07 percent. Total children (0-6) in Nabadwip city are 8,388 as per figure from Census India report on 2011. There were 4,329 boys while 4,059 are girls. The child forms 6.68% of total population of Nabadwip City.[1]
As of 2001 India census, Nabadwip had a population of 115,036. Males constitute 51% of the population and females 49%. Nabadwip has an average literacy rate of 75%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 80%, and female literacy is 70%. In Nabadwip, 9% of the population is under 6 years of age.
There are a total of 18 high and higher secondary schools in Nabadwip, Notables among them are Nabadwip Bakultala High School, Nabadwip Hindu School, Nabadwip Siksha Mandir, R.C.B Saraswatmandir, Jatiya Vidyalaya, Tarasundari Girls High School, Nabadwip Bakultala Girls High School, Nabadwip Balika Vidyalaya and so on.
There is a college namely Nabadwip Vidyasagar College (in the name of the Great Social Reformer and the Father of Bengali Prose) affiliated under University of Kalyani.
In summer, i.e. from April to June, the weather remains hot and temperature ranges from maximum of 35 °C to minimum of 26 °C.
Monsoon season prevails during beginning-June to mid-September. Also retrieving monsoon from mid-October till mid-November
The weather is quite pleasant, the summers and winters are moderate. The level of moisture increases during summers.
There are number of well-known clubs- Nabadwip Puratattava Parisad, Swami Vivekananda Club of Ramgobinda Road, Nadia Club, Nabadwip Muktisurya Club, Royal club, Town club,National club, Nirvik samity, Nabindal, Nabadwip Sporting Club, Vidyasagar Club of Charichara para,Athletic club,Swadhin Bharat Club, Milan Sangha and many others. Puratattava Parisad is a center of historical practice and research and historical preservation center too.
There are also a number of medical associations-
Nabadwip Homœo Study circle
Indian Medical Association &c.
Festivals which are popular in Nabadwip
Pohela Boishakh or Bangla New Year (14/15 April)
Rath Yatra (July)
Ganga puja (June)
Jhulan Purnima (August)
Durga Puja (Sept/Oct)
Ras Festival (রাস যাত্রা) (Oct-Nov)
Annual Tourism (Nov to March)
Saraswati Puja (Feb/March)
Dol Purnima or Dol Yatra (Feb-Mar)
Gaura-purnima, the birthday of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu (Feb-Mar)
Chaitra Sale (March/April).
In all the above,RAS Utsav and Dol Yatra are main attraction .People are coming from all over the world in both the occasion.
These are turned up to be the Festive moods of the people living in this city. Almost whole of the city observe these festivals with pomp and pleasure. The year round one can find the festive moods of people which is also rare in other parts of the world. The reason may be because of convergence of humanity from all parts of the world. There are the Vaishnobite Sect, Shaibite Sect of Hindu Religion assimilated with modern wisdom. Further the typical Bengali culture with its pride, attracts the public into festive mood. The natural beauty, geographic location endowed with the serpentine Ganga and panoramic view thereof, also instill the people merge into fete.
Nabadwip Public Library
Adorsho Pathagar &c.
Shilpi Gosthi Granthagar
Nabadwip Dham is 105 km from Howrah on the Bandel-Katwa Branch Line.
Nabadwip Dham is 65 km from Bandel,105 km from Howrah and 112 km from Sealdah on the Bandel-Katwa-Azimganj section of Eastern Railway. It has very good railway communication with North Bengal,Assam,Bihar,Orissa and Kolkata.
It has 3 railway stations as Nabadwip Dham (NDAE)[3], Bishnupriya (VSPR) of Howrah Division and Nabadwip Ghat (NDF) of Sealdah Division .
Nabadwip- Burdwan Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram
Nabadwip- Benachiti Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram, Burdwan, panagarh
Nabadwip- Asansol Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram, Burdwan, Durgapur
Nabadwip- Burnpur Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram, Burdwan, Durgapur, Asansol
Nabadwip- Bankura Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram, Burdwan, Durgapur
Nabadwip- Kalna Via Samudragarh
Nabadwip- Tarapith Via Katwa
Nabadwip- Tarakeswar Via Memari
Nabadwip- Rampurhat Via Katwa
Nabadwip- Basirhat Via Ranaghat,Habra
Nabadwip- Balurghat Via Berhampur,Maldah
Nabadwip- Siliguri Via Berhampur,Maldah
Nabadwip- Barasat Via Ranaghat
Nabadwip- Kalyani Via Ranaghat
Nabadwip- Memari Via Kalna
Nabadwip- Pandua, Hooghly Via Kalna
Nabadwip- Dinhata Via Berhampur, Maldah, Coochbehar
Nabadwip- Gangarampur Via Berhampur, Maldah
Nabadwip- Barakar Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram, Burdwan, Durgapur, Asansol
Nabadwip- Bajitpur Via Nadanghat, Kusumgram, Burdwan, DurgapurKrishnanagar- Suri via Nabadwip, KatwaKarimpur- Burdwan via Krishnagar, NabadwipSantipur- Benachiti via Nabadwip, BurdwanMaldah- Burdwan via Krishnagar, Nabadwip, BerhampurKrishnanagar- Puruliya via Nabadwip, Burdwan, Durgapur, BankuraKrishnanagar- Bolpur via Nabadwip, KatwaRanaghat- Benachiti via Santipur, Krishnanagar, Nabadwip, Burdwan
