Ranong (Thai: ระนอง (Pronunciation)) is a town (thesaban mueang) in southern Thailand, former capital of the Ranong Province and the Mueang Ranong district. The town covers completely the area of the tambon Khao Niwet (เขานิเวศน์). As of 2005 it had a population of 16,163. Ranong lies 586 km south-south-west of Bangkok by road.
Ranong is on the estuary of the Pak Chan (or Kraburi) River, opposite Myanmar's Victoria Point. The Tenasserim Hills rise directly to the east of Ranong, and another small ridge runs along the edge of the estuary to the town's north.
Ranong has a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen climate classification Am). There is little variation in the temperature throughout the year, although the pre-monsoon months (February to April) are somewhat hotter in the day. However, Ranong's position to the west of the Tenasserim Hills means that the monsoon season's rains are greatly amplified, resulting in torrential rains from May until October, and significant rainfall in the transition months of April and November.
Hot Springs and Raksawarin Park — The temperature of the water in the pools remains constant at 65 °C. There is one place where there is no sulphur. They provide many services such as taking a bath for health, soaking feet, and scalding eggs. This is the most popular tourist spot in Ranong.
Rattanarangsarn Place — King Rama V visited Ranong in 1890. So, Phraya Rattanasetthi (Kor Sim Kong) built this hall for the residence of King Rama V. It is on the hill "Niwest Kiree". King Rama V named this place "Rattanarangsarn".
Phukhao Ya (Khao Hua Lan) or Grass Hill — Grass Hill is a small mountain with no big trees. In rainy weather, grass covers the entire hill.
Ngao Mangrove Forest Research Centre — A UNESCO "world biosphere reserve zone". Its role is to maintain to the mangrove's ecological integrity. Many species of aquatic animals come to the mangrove forest for mating and brooding.
Hat Chan Damri (Chan Damri beach) — A small beach in Paknam Kraburi district. It is near Victoria Point of Myanmar.
Hat Praphat — Hat Praphat is large beach that is paralleled by pine trees. It is at the mouth of canal Kam Phuan, in Amphoe Kapoe.
Hat Bang Ben — Hat Bang Ben is a long sandy beach. It is shaded by pine trees.
Khlong Nakha Wildlife Reserve — A wildlife sanctuary south-east of Ranong. It is in the hills of the Phuket mountain range. This wildlife reserve houses a waterfall known as Namtok Phan Met. This is the place in Thailand where Thai onion plant was discovered. They are harvested in October.
Tham Pra Kha Yang — Several royal insignia and initial letters of famous visitors are inscribed on the walls. A concrete staircase leads to an upper entrance which is reached via a tight squeeze.
Ko Phayam — This island has long white sandy beaches, clear blue sea, and coral reefs. The two main bays are Ao Yai (the sunset bay) and Ao Khao Kwai. The shape is similar to a kangaroo. Small roads without cars, just motorbikes and bicycles. The distance from Ranong is 35 kilometres.
Phetkasem Road (Thailand Route 4) runs through the city. Ranong Airport is about 24 kilometres (15 mi) south of town.
The Port Authority of Thailand operates the Port of Ranong, which is Thailand's principal Indian Ocean port. In 2008, the Ranong human-trafficking incident resulted in 54 deaths.
