Goshogawara (五所川原市, Goshogawara-shi) is a City located in northwestern Aomori Prefecture in the Tōhoku region of Japan.
As of September 2013, the city has an estimated population of 56,564 and a population density of 140 persons per km2. The total area is 404.56 km2.
Goshogawara occupies two discontinuous areas on Tsugaru Peninsula in western Aomori Prefecture. The larger section is landlocked, and is in the middle of the peninsula, and the smaller section is on the Sea of Japan coast. The city has a hot humid continental climate characterized by short warm to hot (and often humid) summers and cold winters with heavy snowfall. Parts of the city are within the limits of the Tsugaru Quasi-National Park.
Aomori
Tsugaru
Itayanagi
Tsuruta
Nakadomari
Imabetsu
Sotogahama
Yomogita
The area of Goshogawara was part of the holdings of the Tsugaru clan of Morioka Domain in the Edo period. After the Meiji Restoration, the area became part of Kitatsugaru District in Aomori Prefecture, and was divided into numerous villages in 1889.
On July 1, 1898, Goshogawara was elevated to town status. On October 1, 1954, Goshogawara absorbed the villages of Sakae, Nakagawa, Nagahashi, Matsushima and Iizume to create the city of Goshogawara. On April 1, 1958, Goshogawara absorbed a portion of the town of Kizukuri.
On March 28, 2005, the town of Kanagi, and the village of Shiura (both from Kitatsugaru District) were merged into Goshogawara.
The economy of Goshogawara is mixed. The city serves as a regional commercial center. Agricultural produce includes rice and apples, and commercial fishing includes clams. The main industrial employer is Toshiba, which operates a factory producing HD DVD drives in the city.
Goshogawara has 11 elementary schools, six middle schools and seven high schools.
Prefectural
Goshogawara High School
Goshogawara Technical High School
Goshogawara Agriculture and Forestry High School
Kanagi High School
Kanagi High School - Shiura Branch
Private
Goshogawara Daiichi High School
Goshogawara Commercial High School
East Japan Railway Company- Gonō Line
Goshogawara,
Tsugaru Railway
Goshogawara, Togawa, Gonōkōmae, Tsugaru-Iizume, Bishamon, Kase, Kanagi, Ashino-Kōen, Kawakura
Japan National Route 101
Japan National Route 339
Goshogawara is famous for its Tachineputa Festival, held annually from August 4th to August 8th. The tachineputa floats are much taller than their counterparts in Aomori and Hirosaki, reaching heights of up to 23 meters.
Tachineputa Museum
Osamu Dazai Memorial Museum
Osamu Dazai – novelist
Bunji Tsushima– politician
Ikuzo Yoshi – Enka singer-songwriter
Shimizugawa Motokichi – sumo wrestler
Kashiwado Risuke – sumo wrestler
Kōji Hirayama – politician
