Jablanica is a town and municipality of the same name in central Bosnia and Herzegovina. The town is situated on the Neretva river and Jablanica lake. Jablanica is a part of the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton.
The municipality of Jablanica is a major tourist destination in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The municipality offer a wide variety of activities. The surrounding mountains such as Plasa, Čvrsnica and Prenj offer both hunting grounds and a variety of hiking trails. One popular hiking destination is "Hajdučka Vrata", a natural wonder, the product of wind erosion, located 2,000 meters above sea level on the mountain of Čvrsnica.
Risovac is a settlement in the municipality, located on a plateau outside of the city, it has several attractions. It is the site of two necropolises, both locations filled with medieval tombstones known as Stećci. Stećci necropolises are characteristic and most prevalent in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Risovac also has a ski center attracting winter tourists.
The Jablanica Lake (Jablaničko Jezero) is a very important resource. The lake borders many of its settlements and is used for several purposes. The lake is used to generate electricity while it also serves as a top summer destination for fishing, swimming, water sports and other activities. Notable settlements include Ostrožac which hosts the start of the annual rowing marathon and Donje Paprasko, the location of a public beach and the host of the marathon finish line.
The mean elevation of Jablanica is 202 metres (663 ft) above sea level. Some 69% of the municipalities 301 km2 (116 sq mi) of area is forested. The Jablanica lake is an important geographical as well as economic presence in Jablanica.
• Baćina • Bijela • Čehari • Čivelj • Djevor • Dobrigošće • Dobrinja • Doljani • Donja Jablanica • Donje Paprasko • Dragan Selo • Glodnica • Glogošnica • Gornje Paprasko • Jablanica • Jelačići • Kosne Luke • Krstac • Lendava • Lug • Mirke • Mrakovo • Ostrožac • Poda • Ravna • Risovac • Rodići • Slatina • Sovići • Šabančići • Šanica • Zlate i Žuglići.
10,111 total
9,045 Bosniaks (89.46%)
726 Croats (7.18%)
63 Serbs (0.62%)
277 others (2.74%)
The main local government of the municipality is Municipal Council of Jablanica (Bosnian: Općinska skupština; Croatian: Općinsko vijeće; Serbian Latin: Opštinska skupština). Council has 19 members elected for a four-year term by proportional representation. Glamoč also has its municipal mayor who is the highest-ranking officer in the municipal government.
During the Battle of the Neretva in 1943, Jablanica was the site of a successful raid by a group of Partisans led by Josip Broz Tito. A rail bridge over the river was blown up while a train was in the middle of crossing. There is a park and monument commemorating this action at the site. The bridge section and the locomotive which can still be seen in the river gorge are the remains of a film set depicting the battle, from the 1960s.
Vahid Halilhodžić, former football player, football manager
Senad Lulić, footballer
Hasan Salihamidžić, footballer
Mirza Teletović, basketball player
Jasmin Šćuk, footballer
