Pingxiang (simplified Chinese: 萍乡; traditional Chinese: 萍鄉; pinyin: Píngxiāng; Wade–Giles: P'ing-hsiang) is a medium-sized prefecture-level city located in western Jiangxi province, People's Republic of China.
Pingxiang is a limitrophe city between Jiangxi and Hunan provinces. Approximately 100 miles from Changsha, Hunan, about 160 miles from Nanchang. Most of the area around the city is hilly and mountainous, despite of the city itself is relatively flat. As a sub-tropical climatic city, Pingxiang has mild winters, long and hot summers, plenty of rain falls. Annual average temperature is 17 °C. The population was 1,874,000 in the 2012 for most of citizens are permanent residents.
Archaeological evidence suggests that Pingxiang was first settled during the Stone Age. During the Han dynasty, it was part of Yichun. In 267, during the time of the Three Kingdoms, it became Pingxiang County, which made it a higher level of administration than what it is today. During the Tang Dynasty (618-907), it was part of the Jiangnanxi Circuit, and was called Yuanzhou. Its name and area of administration were changed many times until 1970, when it assumed its present form.
Pingxiang has direct jurisdiction over two urban districts, one economic development area, three counties, 28 towns, 18 townships, and 7 sub-districts.
Urban Districts:
Anyuan District (安源区)
Xiangdong District (湘东区)
Anyuan Economic Development Zone (安源经济开发区)
Counties:
Shangli County (上栗县)
Luxi County (芦溪县)
Lianhua County (莲花县)
The population of the total administrative area of Pingxiang is estimated to be 1,874,000 at the 2012 census.
In 2013, the GDP was 79.2 billion RMB, a 8.2% growth over the previous year. Rural income was 11,100 RMB, a 10.5% growth over 2012 and urban income was 23,489 RMB, an 11% growth over 2012 (without regard to inflation).
Pingxiang has abundant water and mineral resources,five rivers flow across the land which delivers approximately 2.626 billion cubic meters per year. Coals, Iron ores, Limestones,Kaolin and Granites are the most abundant minerals of the city. Even today, the Pingxiangren or local people proudly refer to their city as the "coal center of southern China."
Pingxiang is a regional hub for transportation. About 1.5 hrs drive to the CSX from downtown of Pingxiang. A couple of highways and the main rail line between Changsha and Nanchang run through the city. Much more the city has high-speed railway which available in September,2014.
Wugong (also known as WooKong) mountain is a national well known place for tourism, lies in the east of Pingxiang, three quarters drive from downtown, the vertex altitude is 1,918 meters while average altitude is about 1,500 meters.Most of the landscape remains virginal in despite of some necessary infrastructures that benefit tourists.
Yangqi mountain is famous for the religious of buddhism, lies in north of Pingxiang, one hrs drive from downtown.
Nielongdong (also known as Sinful Dragon Cave ) has an amazing tale which refers to Chinese traditional religious and zodiac. The place also well known for its gorgeous landscape, lies in the north of Pingxiang, about 20 minutes drive from downtown.
