The Ferrari F2008 is a Formula One motor racing car, which Scuderia Ferrari Marlboro used to compete in the 2008 Formula One season.
The car was unveiled to the public on January 6, 2008. It features a new standard Electronic Control Unit (ECU), which is the electronic system that controls all the cars, produced by McLaren Electronic Systems. This was included to comply with the new regulations. The ECU also removes most of the driver aids used in previous seasons, including traction control, engine braking and electronically assisted starting system. It also makes the management of the differential, engine and gearchanges easier.
The car also weighs more than last season's F2007 chassis due to rule changes which includes the gearbox which has to be used for four consecutive races, higher side protection around the drivers helmet etc.
World champion Kimi Räikkönen gave the car its first shakedown at Ferrari's Fiorano test track on January 7, 2008.
In the 2008 Australian Grand Prix, Felipe Massa suffered nose cone and front wing damage after an incident with Coulthard.
In the 2008 Monaco Grand Prix, Kimi Räikkönen lost his front wing after sliding into the back of Adrian Sutil at the Nouvelle chicane.
In the 2008 Canadian Grand Prix, Räikkönen lost his rear wing in the pit lane, after Lewis Hamilton collided with him while the red light still on.
In the 2008 Belgian Grand Prix, Räikkönen suffered front wing damage after running wide then spinning before the chicane.
In the 2008 Singapore Grand Prix, Massa was unsafely released from his pit box with the fuel hose still attached; Räikkönen suffered a suspension problem then hit the wall in the kerbs.
(key) (results in bold indicate pole position; results in italics indicate fastest lap)
† Drivers did not finish the Grand Prix, but were classified as they completed over 90% of the race distance.
Räikkönen's fastest lap at the Circuit de Barcelona-Catalunya is still the lap record as of 2014.
Car Specs and photos (Spanish)
Car Specs on F1Technical.net