Černošice (Czech pronunciation: [ˈtʃɛrnoʃɪtsɛ]) is a town in Central Bohemian Region, Czech Republic. The town is part of the Prague metropolitan area. It is located 5 kilometres (3 miles) southwest of Prague, it lies on the Berounka River. The present-day town is made up of three parts: Horní Černosice, Dolní Mokropsy and Vráž.
In Černošice there are two train stations: Černošice and Černošice-Mokropsy.
The village Dolní Mokropsy was first mentioned in 1088 and Horní Černošice in 1115. In Horní Černošice there was built the Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary which was first mentioned in 1352 when it served as a parish church. A few farms stood around this church. The villages stood at two important trade routs - the route from Prague to Bechyně and from Prague to Karlštejn Castle.
Černošice was heavily damaged during the Thirty Years' War in 1639 when it was burnt to the ground by the Swedish army moving towards Prague. During the war, there was a great decline in population because of the war losses, epidemics and emigration.
In 1862 the railway stations in Černošice were opened as a part of the new-built railway from Prague to Plzeň (Pilsen). The new railway brought about a tourist and building boom. Lidos were founded along the river and many new villas were built. Černošice became one of the most famous residential and weekend-cottage satellites before. During this time Černošice started to lose its agricultural character. The development of the towns was stopped during the World Wars. In 1950, the originally separate villages were joined together and named Černošice.
The English book The Twelve Little Cakes by Dominka Dery was written about the life of a dissident family during the Communist times in Černošice.
In Černošice there are two churches. The Catholic Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary stands there since the Middle Ages and is the oldest preserved building in the town. In 2010 there was built a new church of Církev bratrská.
MUDr. Jan Janský
Ferenc Futurista - Actor
Dominika Dery - Author
Věra Čáslavská - Winner of seven Olympic gold medals in gymnastics, former adviser to President Václav Havel, former President of Czech Olympic Committee
