A peninsula (Latin: paeninsula from paene "almost" and insula "island") is a piece of land that is bordered by water on three sides but connected to mainland. The surrounding water is usually understood to be continuous, though not necessarily named as such. A peninsula can also be a headland, cape, island promontory, bill, point, or spit. A point is generally considered a tapering piece of land projecting into a body of water that is less prominent than a cape. In English, the plural of peninsula is peninsulas or, less commonly, peninsulae. A river which courses through a very tight meander is also sometimes said to form a "peninsula" within the (almost closed) loop of water.
The Horn of Africa is a peninsula compassing of the countries of Somalia, Eritrea, Djibouti, and Ethiopia.
Buri Peninsula, Eritrea
Ras Hafun, Somalia
Ras Kasar, Eritrea
Antarctic Peninsula
Edward VII Peninsula
Fletcher Peninsula
Fowler Peninsula
Martin Peninsula
Kowloon Peninsula
Beirut, Lebanon
El Mina, Lebanon
Haifa, Israel
Acre, Israel
The Indian subcontinent is a peninsula, the only land feature in the world that is widely recognized as a subcontinent in the English language.
Nishi-sonogi-hanto
Kunisaki-hanto
Satsuma-hanto
Osumi-hanto
Oshika-hanto
Noto-hanto
Oga-hanto
Miura-hanto
Boso-hanto
Shiretoko Peninsula
Shakotan Peninsula
Mangyshlak Peninsula
The whole land mass encompassing North and South Korea is a peninsula, surrounded by the Sea of Korea on the east, the East China Sea to the south, and the West Sea to the west, the Korea Strait connecting the first two bodies of water.
Arabian Peninsula; Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, Jordan, United Arab Emirates, Yemen, Oman
Qatar
Al-Faw Peninsula, Iraq
Musandam Peninsula; Oman, United Arab Emirates
Indochina Peninsula
Malay Peninsula
Northwestern Peninsula, Kudat
Pitas Peninsula, Pitas
Semporna Peninsula, Semporna and Tawau
Sandakan Peninsula, Sandakan
Tuas View, Tuas
Europe is sometimes considered to be a large peninsula extending off Eurasia. As such, it is one of the largest peninsulas in the world and the only one to have the status as a full continent, largely as a matter of convention rather than science. It is composed of many smaller peninsulas, the four main component peninsulas being the Iberian, Scandinavian, Italian, and Balkan peninsulas.
The Balkans is a peninsula including Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and the European part of Turkey.
Brittany
Cap Corse, Corsica
Cotentin Peninsula, Normandy
Crozon, Finistère
Landes du Médoc, Aquitaine
Encompassing continental Spain and Portugal, Andorra, British overseas territory of Gibraltar and a small amount of southern France.
Scandinavia is a peninsula and along with other islands encompassing present-day Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and part of Finland.
Gallipoli Peninsula
Thracian Peninsula
Crimean peninsula, disputed between Ukraine and Russia
Chonhar Peninsula
Kinburn peninsula
Rybalskyi Peninsula
Ards Peninsula, County Down
Island Magee
Lecale peninsula
Ramore Head, Portrush
Le Clos du Valle, Guernsey
Little Sark, Sark
Peninsula de Samaná, Dominican Republic
Barrio Obrero, Puerto Rico
Zapata Peninsula, Cuba
Guanahacabibes Peninsula, Cuba
Hicacos Peninsula, Cuba
Alfred Wegeners Halvo
Hayes Halvo
Ingnerit
Nuussuaq Peninsula
Sigguup Nunaa (Svartenhuk Halvø)
Baja California Peninsula, Mexico, containing the states of Baja California and Baja California Sur
Yucatán Peninsula, partly separating the Gulf of Mexico from the Caribbean
Alaska Peninsula
Cleveland Peninsula
Kenai Peninsula
Seward Peninsula
Florida is a well-known example of a large peninsula, with its land area divided between the larger Florida peninsula and the smaller Florida panhandle on the north and west. It has several smaller peninsulas within it:
The St. Johns River creates a large peninsula over 75 miles in length that stretches from eastern Jacksonville down to the border of Flagler and Volusia counties, where the river emanates from Lake George.
Fairpoint Peninsula
Pinellas peninsula including St. Petersburg and Clearwater
Much of Tampa lies on a peninsula called Interbay Peninsula jutting out into Tampa Bay
Cape Sable
Maryland shares the Delmarva Peninsula east of Chesapeake Bay with Delaware and Virginia.
St. Mary's Peninsula is defined by the Patuxent River, the Potomac River, and Chesapeake Bay.
Calvert Peninsula lies between Chesapeake Bay and the Patuxent River.
Numerous smaller tidal tributaries form smaller peninsulas on both the Eastern and Western shores of Chesapeake Bay. Named examples include the Broadneck Peninsula in Anne Arundel County and the Elk Neck Peninsula in Cecil County.
Cape Cod, Massachusetts, a cape that can be viewed as a peninsula
Nahant, a town in Essex County, is on a small peninsula.
Nantasket Peninsula, Hull
Irondequoit, NY (Geographical headland)
Antelope Island, Utah, becomes a peninsula when waters are low, on the south shore of the Great Salt Lake
Promontory Peninsula, on the north eastern shore of the Great Salt Lake
Stansbury Peninsula becomes an island when waters are high, on the south shore of the Great Salt Lake
Middle Peninsula, on the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay
Northern Neck, on the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay
Virginia Peninsula, on the western shore of the Chesapeake Bay
Key Peninsula in Puget Sound
Kitsap Peninsula in Puget Sound
Long Beach Peninsula
Olympic Peninsula
Magnolia, Seattle
Gazelle Peninsula, New Britain
Huon Peninsula
Papuan Peninsula
In the North Island
In the South Island
Isthmus
Tombolo
Cape (geography)
Salient (geography)
