Alblasserdam (Dutch: [ɑlˌblɑsərˈdɑm]) is a town and municipality in the western Netherlands, in the province of South Holland. It covers an area of 10.06 km2 (3.88 sq mi), of which 1.27 km2 (0.49 sq mi) is water, and has a population of 19,838 as of 2014. Alblasserdam is officially a part of the Drechtsteden region. A portion of the small village of Kinderdijk, which boasts the largest and most famous concentration of windmills in the Netherlands, is part of Alblasserdam.
The name Alblasserdam is derived from its location near the creek Alblas where a dam was built. Inhabitants of Alblasserdam are called Alblasserdammers (singular: Alblasserdammer).
The town of Alblasserdam was first mentioned in the chronicles of Melis Stoke in 1299, but the municipality wasn't formed until 1447. Before that, it was part of Oud-Alblas.
Because of its location on the Noord river, one of the busiest waterways in Western Europe, water has played a major role in Alblasserdam's history. The river was important for its development and makes it an advantageous location for industry. Alblasserdam's strategic location also brought it negative consequences. For example, between 1350 and 1821, the Alblasserwaard polder flooded 32 times.
During World War I, mayor Simon Berman and the local government of Alblasserdam kept busy with 60 Belgian refugees within the municipal boundaries. An ad-hoc municipal fund for the unemployed was established.
Alblasserdam suffered during the German raid on Rotterdam on May 11, 1940, when its town centre was severely damaged. The historic Kerkstraat (Church Street) and the characteristic dike construction along the river, however, were spared.
The North Sea flood of 1953 also affected a portion of Alblasserdam. The Delta Works program included reinforcements to the dikes and improvement of the locks. Therefore, water no longer poses a direct danger to Alblasserdam.
In 1999 the town celebrated its 700th anniversary.
Bert Blase served as mayor from 1999 to 2014, when he was appointed as mayor of Vlaardingen. Since then, the mayor of Hendrik-Ido-Ambacht, Jan Heijkoop, also acts as mayor Alblasserdam until the appointment of a new mayor by the Dutch government.
Waterbus route 1:
Rotterdam Willemskade - Krimpen aan den IJssel Stormpolder - Ridderkerk De Schans - Alblasserdam Kade - Dordrecht Merwekade.
 Sereď, Slovak Republic
