Kastav (Italian: Castua) is a historical town located about 10 kilometres (6 miles) northwest of Rijeka and about 5 km (3 mi) northeast of Opatija in Primorje-Gorski Kotar County in Croatia.
The total population of Kastav is 10,472 (census 2011).
The census of 2001 had recorded the following settlements:
Brnčići, population 677
Ćikovići, population 3,089
Kastav, population 2,037
Rubeši, population 1,722
Spinčići, population 876
Trinajstići, population 490
In the 2011 census, there was only one settlement, Kastav.
Kastav was built on an isolated hill 378 metres (1,240 feet) above sea level. Its historic center, many parks and big forest are attractive to foreign visitors and hikers. The historic walled town contains a church dating from the 13th century which hosts an international music festival each summer.
The Kastav Statute (Croatian: Statut Grada Kastva) was written in 1400, and confirms the status of Croatian city Kastav as an administrative and political centre from the late 14th century.
Because of its unusual but good position Kastav has really hot summers and very cold winters; during the summer temperatures can rise to 37 °C (99 °F), sometimes even more. In summer evenings Kastav is crowded with walkers who come for the fresh air in the forest and for sport, athletes who have their summer break but want to stay in good shape. In winter Kastav is one of the first places in the Kvarner region to become white with snow.
Industry in Kastav isn't developed because citizens of Kastav are focused on work in nearby Rijeka and Opatija, but there are still private stores and companies led by well situated people. Estates in Kastav are very valuable because of its excellent position for living and views of Kvarner and the many islands in the Kvarner region. With faster access from Croatia to the European Union, interest in estates in that part of Croatia is growing.
However, recently developed industrial zone located east of town centre attracts companies and small business. That area has grown rapidly in years since 2006, and continues to grow bringing Kastav back to top of regional industry rates.
Sport and recreation in Kastav are well known in Croatia and in countries nearby like Slovenia and Italy. Kastav has successful sports teams in karate,volleyball, handball, indoor-soccer and, basketball.
