Samobor (pronounced [sâmɔ̝bɔ̝ːr]) is a city in Zagreb County, Croatia. It is part of the Zagreb metropolitan area.
Samobor is located west of Zagreb, between the eastern slopes of the Samobor hills (Croatian: Samoborsko gorje), the eastern part of Žumberak Mountain, in the Sava River valley. It is part of the historical region of Croatia proper.
The city government, court, police, health service, and a post office are part of the Samobor infrastructure.
Samobor has existed as a free royal town since 1242, according to a document of endowment by King Béla IV.
Since the Treaty of Karlowitz in 1699, SZAMOBOR was part of the Habsburg Monarchy, (Transleithania after the compromise of 1867), and soon after in the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia, created when the Kingdom of Slavonia and the Kingdom of Croatia were merged in 1868. In the late 19th and early 20th century, Samobor was a district capital in the Zagreb County of the Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia.
One of the chief industries in Samobor is crystal cutting, acclaimed in Europe and all over the world.
Many well-known Croats were born or lived in Samobor. Such notable personalities are:
Ferdo Livadić, a prominent member of the nationalist Illyrian movement in the 19th century, piano composer and writer of the most famous Croatian patriotic song (Croatian: budnica) of the 19th century, Još Horvatska ni propala (English: Croatia Hasn't Perished Yet)
Antun Gustav Matoš, poet and writer, lived in Samobor for four years
Milan Lang, reformer of education in Croatia and teacher at the Samobor school
Antonio Šančić, tennis player
Lana Genc, classical pianist
In the 2011 Croatian census, the total population of the administrative territory of Samobor was 37,633, distributed in the following settlements:
Samobor is one of the earliest tourist resorts in the region, with the first tourist facilities dating back to 1810, catering to anglers, hunters and hikers. The town's beautiful surroundings and vicinity to the capital have supported this tourist tradition to the present day. In 1846, Samobor was paid a visit by the composer Franz Liszt, who at that time was visiting Zagreb during one of his numerous concert tours. Liszt came to Samobor to see his friend Ferdo Livadić, in his lodgings at the Livadić mansion, which is today the town museum. At the beginning of the 20th century, the Livadić mansion came under the ownership of a Jewish family named Daničić. They were forced to leave as a result of the Nazi invasion in 1941. Shortly after this, the mansion was confiscated by the newly formed Independent State of Croatia and never returned to the Daničić family.
On Tepec hill, only 10 minutes walk from the city centre, there are still-visible remains of the Samobor Castle fortress built in the 13th century.
There are two elementary schools and one high school in Samobor:
Osnovna škola Bogumil Toni (English: Bogumil Toni Elementary School)
Osnovna škola Samobor (English: Samobor Elementary School)(formerly Osnovna škola Janko Mišić)
Srednja škola Samobor (English: Samobor High School), consisting of two academies teaching arts such as economy and trade; the Gimnazija Antuna Gustava Matoša (English: Antun Gustav Matoš Comprehensive School);
and the Srednja strukovna škola Samobor - with technical studies, hairdressing, etc.
There is also a music academy - Glazbena škola Ferdo Livadić.
The local football club is NK Samobor, who play in the Treća HNL. The local woman handball club is ŽRK Samobor, who play in the Prva HRL
Samobor is twinned with:
 Wirges, Germany
 Veles, Macedonia
 Stari Grad, Croatia
 Pécs, Hungary
 Chassieu, France
 Parabiago, Italy
Zagreb County
