Gmunden ([ˈɡmʊndən]) is a town in Upper Austria, Austria in the district of Gmunden. It has 13,104 inhabitants (estimates 2015). It is much frequented as a health and summer resort, and has a variety of lake, brine, vegetable and pine-cone baths, a hydropathic establishment, inhalation chambers, whey cure, etc. It is also an important centre of the salt industry in Salzkammergut.
Gmunden covers an area of 63.49 km² and has a median height of 425 m. It is situated next to the lake Traunsee on the Traun River and is surrounded by high mountains, as the Traunstein (mountain) (5446 ft.), the Erlakogel (5150 ft.), the Wilder Kogel (6860 ft.) and the Höllengebirge.
Gmunden is divided into the following boroughs: Gmunden, Gmunden-Ort, Schlagen, Traundorf, Unterm Stein.
As of 2001, Gmunden has a population of 13,336. Of that, 88.4% are Austrian in nationality, 1.5% are from other European Union states, and 10.2% are other foreigners. Citizens of Bosnia-Herzegovina (3.6%) and the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (2.7%) placed the strongest foreigner portion, followed by Turks (1.2%) and Germans (1.1%).
The majority (69.3%) confess themselves to the Roman Catholic Church. Evangelicals are next, which 7.3% of the population associate with. 5.9% are Muslims and 3.3% are Orthodox. 10.3% are nonreligious.
A settlement was in existence already in the fifth century AC. By 1186 Gmunden was a fortified place surrounded by walls, although it did not receive a church until about 1300. In 1278 Gmunden became a town. On November 14, 1626 an army of rebellious peasants was completely defeated at Gmunden by General Pappenheim, who had been ordered by Maximilian I to suppress the peasant rebellion in Upper Austria. The dead peasant insurgents were buried in nearby Pinsdorf, where an obelisk styled memorial known as the Bauernhügel in their honour can still be seen.
Gmunden supplied battleships to Austria during the 17th century and helped wounded soldiers in hospitals in World War I. During World War II, an SS maternity home was located here, "to insure racial purity" in accordance with Nazi racial theories.
The local council consists of 37 members. Since 2009 the members are from the following political parties:
ÖVP: 19 seats
SPÖ: 8 seats
FPÖ: 5 seats
Die Grünen: 4 seats
Gmundner Stadtliste: 1 seat
Since 1997 the mayor has been Heinz Köppl of the ÖVP. Since 2014 the mayor is Stefan Krapf of the ÖVP.
There are a great number of excursions and points of interest round Gmunden, specially worth mentioning being the Traun Fall, 10 miles (16 km) north of Gmunden, a castle called Schloss Ort, and a ceramic factory producing Gmundner Keramik branded pottery. The town hall is also a popular tourist destination.
In Gmunden there are four kindergartens, four elementary schools and three Hauptschulen. The three high schools are BG/BRG Gmunden, BRG Schloss Traunsee, and Gymnasium Ort.
Caspar Erasmus Duftschmid, born in Gmunden
Heinrich Schiff, cellist and conductor, born in Gmunden
Duchess Maria Amalia of Württemberg, born in Gmunden; see Albrecht, Duke of Württemberg
Johannes von Gmunden
Andreas Berger, born in Gmunden
Princess Marie Louise of Hanover, born here
Princess Alexandra of Hanover (1882–1963), born at the Schloss Ort
Prince Otto Heinrich of Hanover, born here
Prince George William of Hanover (1880–1912), born in Gmunden
Prince Christian Oscar of Hanover, born in Gmunden
Prince Welf Henry of Hanover, born in Gmunden
Conchita Wurst, drag queen and winner of Eurovision Song Contest 2014
Thomas Bernhard, playwright and novelist
Annika Grill, Miss Austria 2015
George V of Hanover, exiled here
Ernest Augustus, Crown Prince of Hanover, exiled and died in Gmunden
Princess Thyra of Denmark, lived and died in Gmunden
Princess Marie of Hanover, lived and died in Gmunden
Ludwig Bemelmans, grew up in Gmunden
Gabi Burgstaller, went to high school in Gmunden
Walter Reder, buried here
Betty Haag, worked near in Gmunden as a professor
Jory Vinikour, worked as a teacher at the Austrian Baroque Academy of Gmunden
Marie of Saxe-Altenburg, exiled and died in Gmunden
Princess Frederica of Hanover, lived in Gmunden
Frederick Francis IV, Grand Duke of Mecklenburg, married in Gmunden
Christoph Ransmayr, grew up near in Gmunden
Carl Rahl, lived here
Christian Griepenkerl, lived here
John Haswell, worked here
Horaz Krasnopolski, died here
Matthias von Schönerer, worked here
Prince Christian of Hanover (1885–1901), died here
Count Richard Belcredi, died here
Archduchess Margarete Sophie of Austria, died here
Princess Maria Antonia of the Two Sicilies, died here
Princess Olga of Hanover (1884–1958), lived and died here
Alexandra, Princess of Leiningen, married here
Prince Ludwig Rudolph of Hanover, died in Gmunden
Gmunden Straßenbahn, the town tramway.
