Yasuj (Persian: ياسوج‎‎; also Romanized as Yāsūj, Yasooj, and Yesūj; Lurish: یاسووج or یاسیچ - Jasuc and Jasyç) is a city in and the capital of Kohgiluyeh and Boyer-Ahmad Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 96,786, in 20,297 families.
Yasuj is an industrial city in the Zagros Mountains of southwestern Iran. The term "Yasuj" is also used to refer to the entire region.
Yasuj has both a sugar processing plant and a coal-burning powerplant that generates electricity for the area.
The people of Yasuj speak Luri dialect of Persian.
The area of Yasuj has been settled since as early as the Bronze Age. Findings include the Martyrs Hills (dating from 3rd millennium BC), the Khosravi Hill from the Achaemenian period, the ancient site of Gerd, the Pataveh bridge, and the Pay-e Chol cemetery. Yasuj is the place where Alexander III of Macedon and his Macedonian forces stormed the Persian Gates ("Darvazeh-ye Fars"), and fought themselves a way into the Persian heartland (331 BC).
The Yasuj Museum, which opened in 2002, displays coins, statues, pottery, and bronze vessels recovered from surrounding archaeological sites. Yasuj was called Tal-e Khosrow (Khosrow Hill) in the last century.
Yasuj has the typical continentally-influenced Mediterranean climate (Köppen Csa) of western Iran, though because of its location in the direct line of rain-bearing winds from the Persian Gulf it is the wettest Iranian city south of the Elburz Mountains with an annual rainfall nine times that of Isfahan and twice that of Kermanshah. The heavy precipitation allows the existence of small glaciers on the highest Zagros peaks – in contrast the Kuhrud Mountains to the east have no glaciers despite being of the same height due to aridity.
The economy of Yasuj is based on the following local activities:
baskets
carpets/rugs
mosaic tiles
bricks
livestock feed
By 2014 a new refinery will be constructed by the private sector, at a cost of $2.2 billion. It will produce petrol, gasoil, kerosene, furnace oil, liquefied gas, asphalt, and sulfur.
Yasuj University of Medical Sciences
Yasuj Chemical Engineering School
