Oscar Rubén Larrauri (born August 19, 1954 in Granadero Baigorria) is a racing driver from Argentina. He participated in 21 Formula One Grands Prix, all with the struggling EuroBrun team, debuting on April 3, 1988 at the Brazilian Grand Prix (Larrauri qualified 26th but did not start due to the car overheating on the parade lap). He scored no championship points, only qualifying 8 times.
He was for many years part of Brun Motorsport in sports car racing, and involved in the World Sportscar Championship, IMSA GT Championship, Deutsche Rennsport Meisterschaft, and All Japan Sports Prototype Championship during his career.
After spending a number of years in sports cars, Brun Motorsport owner Walter Brun decided to move into Formula One in 1988. Brun Motorsport formed an alliance with Giampaolo Pavanello's Euroracing team who had previously run the factory backed Alfa Romeo team from 1982-1985. The team became known as EuroBrun and Larrauri was signed to drive for the team alongside 1987 Formula 3000 champion Stefano Modena.
The EuroBrun ER188, powered by the 590 bhp (440 kW; 598 PS) Cosworth DFZ V8 engine, proved to be one of the slowest cars in its debut season with Larrauri in particular gaining an unwanted reputation as a mobile road block in the René Arnoux mould (i.e. one who rarely used his mirrors and often held up faster cars from lapping him, and even getting in the way during qualifying runs). Larrauri's best finish for the year was a 13th place in Mexico (Rd.4) with his only other finish being a 16th place in Germany (Rd.8). With a lack of results coming, Brun actually looked to replace the Argentine in mid-season, but no driver was available who could fit into the car and Larrauri was retained for the rest of the season.
Without a drive at the start of 1989, Larrauri only entered in the last five Grands Prix of the season, again with EuroBrun, though he failed to pre-qualify on each occasion bringing an end to his brief Formula One career. Larrauri then moved back into sports car racing.
(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap)
(key)
