Hoyo de Manzanares is a municipality of the Community of Madrid, Spain located on the Northeastern side of the community of Madrid and to the south of the Sierra de Guadarrama.
It has a stable population of roughly 7,457 residents (INE 2008), a statistic that has been increasing consistently from the economic crisis. The population also greatly increases during the summer as a result from various families who own summer houses in the area.
This district of Madrid is found inside of the Parque Regional de la Cuenca Alta del Manzanares created by the community of Madrid in 1985. The Parque Regional de la Cuenca Alta del Manzanares is the oldest and most protected regional park in the community of Madrid. As a result, Hoyo de Manzanares is surrounded by mountains and fields of land that give the town a beautiful view.
The only way to arrive in Hoyo de Manzanares from the city of Madrid, is through the M-618 highway that bisects the regional park, passing the nearby towns of Torrelodones, Colemenar Viejo and lastly Hoyo de Manzanares.
Lots of evidence has been found of ancient life in this small town, but it wasn’t until the Middle Ages that life had been actually documented in this particular district of Madrid. After the Reconquista, Hoyo de Manzanares was quickly repopulated by Moriscos, Philistines, Segovians and of course Madridians. This mixed population remained as it was, until 1609 to 1614 where the Spanish government forced Moriscos to leave the kingdom of Spain after the marriage of the queen of Castille, Isabel, and the King of Aragon, Ferdinand. The town then lost most of its population, but remained constant for the following years.
There are all forms of education in Hoyo de Manzanares. The first is a private daycare named Babyplay and the second is a public daycare named Los Tajetes. There is one public preschool, one public elementary school, and one public secondary school. There also exists a private university named the Universidad Antonio de Nebrija.
The Academy of Engineers of Madrid, founded in 1803, is located in Hoyo de Manzanares, Madrid. This academy contains one of the largest libraries of northern Madrid, containing various donated volumes of books about the Spanish Civil War.
