Mwanza is a mid-sized port city on the southern shores of Lake Victoria in northwestern Tanzania. With a population of over 700,000, it is Tanzania's second largest city, following Dar es Salaam. Mwanza is the capital of the surrounding Mwanza Region.
The Sukuma constitute over 90 percent of the population of the Mwanza Region. Other ethnic groups in the region, in much smaller proportions, include the Zinza, Haya, Sumbwa, Nyamwezi, Luo, Kurya, Jita,((shashi)) and Kerewe. They live mainly in the Mwanza city area. National policy, however, gives very little importance to ethnic groupings and reliable data is difficult to find.
In 2011 the city council announced plans to create a major commercial development in the Ilemela District. Construction works on Rock City Mall are set to be finalized in the second half of 2015. This mall will be the first of its size in Mwanza and one of the biggest malls in the country.
One major occupation of the inhabitants along the shores of Lake Victoria in Mwanza region is fishing, and there are five fish processing plants in the area. Nile perch were previously introduced to the lake, and are exported in large quantities.
The consequences of the nile perch industry are the subject of the Academy Award nominated documentary Darwin's Nightmare (2004) by Hubert Sauper.
On the lake around Mwanza, a lot of sardine fishing ( locally known as 'dagaa') takes place.
Mwanza is served by Mwanza Airport, which is located at 10 km to the north of the city centre in Ilemela District.
The airport has flights to Dar es Salaam, Nairobi, and other destinations around Tanzania.
Mwanza's railway station is located in the centre of town, in Nyamagana District.
The city is connected by rail with Shinyanga. Twice a week the train departs to Dar es Salaam, via Dodoma, Tabora and Kigoma.
Two bus stations connect Mwanza to the rest of Tanzania and neighbouring countries by road: Nyegezi and Buzuruga bus station.
Nyegezi bus station is located in Nyamagana district. Buses going to the south and west leave from Nyegezi, as well as international services.
Buzuruga bus station is located in Ilemela district. Buses going to the east, North and the Kenyan border depart from Buzuruga bus station.
In December 2014 the regular ferry service between Mwanza, Bukoba and Kampala was halted whilst the ferry boat (Mv Victoria) underwent major maintenance.
Toto African is the main football club in Mwanza. The team participates in the 2015/2016 Tanzanian Premier League. Home games are played at CCM Kirumba Stadium.
St. Augustine University of Tanzania (SAUT) is the main university in Mwanza. The University extends over 600 acres (243 ha) in the Nyegezi-Malimbe area 10 km south of Mwanza City. It lies 4 km off the main Mwanza- Shinyanga road on the shores of Lake Victoria. The University is a half-hour’s drive from Mwanza by car or by bus.
 Tampere, Finland: The relationship between Tampere and Mwanza is part of the North-South Local Government Co-operation Programme. The programme is coordinated by the Association of Finnish Local and Regional Authorities and funded by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland. The purpose is to support the Mwanza City Council in implementing the city strategy and in providing better services for its citizens.
 Tifariti, Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic
 Würzburg, Germany
