The Special Region of Yogyakarta (/ˌjɒɡjəˈkɑːrtə/ or /ˌjoʊɡjəˈkɑːrtə/; Indonesian: Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta, or DIY) is a region of Indonesia in the middle of Java. Its administrative capital is city of Yogyakarta.
Although it is a separate administrative entity, Yogyakarta is historically and culturally part of the Central Java. It is the only region in Indonesia that is still governed by a pre-colonial monarchy, the Sultan of Yogyakarta, who serves as the hereditary governor of the region. The recent Sultan is Sultan Hamengkubuwono X.
In Javanese it is pronounced [joɡjaˈkartɔ], and named after the city of Ayodhya in Javanese-Hindu mythology.
The Dutch name of the Special Region is Djokjakarta.
The Sultanate has existed in various forms through prehistory, and survived through the rule of the Dutch and the 1942 invasion of the Dutch East Indies by the Japanese Empire. In August 1945 Indonesia's first president, Sukarno proclaimed the independence of the Indonesian Republic, and by September of that year, Sultan Hamengkubuwono IX and duke Sri Paku Alam VIII had sent letters to Sukarno expressing their support for the newly-born nation of Indonesia, in which they acknowledged the Yogyakarta Sultanate as part of the Indonesian Republic. The Sunanate of Surakarta did the same, and both of the Javanese kingdoms were awarded special status as special regions within Indonesian Republic. However, due to a leftist anti-royalist uprising in Surakarta, the Sunanate of Surakarta lost its special administrative status in 1946 and was absorbed into the province of Central Java.
Yogyakarta's support was essential in the Indonesian struggle for independence during the Indonesian National Revolution (1945-1949). The city of Yogyakarta became the capital of the Indonesian Republic from January 1946 to December 1948 after the fall of Jakarta to the Dutch. Later, the Dutch also invaded Yogyakarta causing the Indonesian Republic's capital to be transferred again to Bukittinggi in West Sumatra on 19 December 1948. In return for Yogyakarta's support, the declaration of Special Authority over Yogyakarta was granted in full in 1950 and Yogyakarta was given the status as a Special Administrative Region, making Yogyakarta the only region headed by a monarchy in Indonesia.
The Special Region was struck by a 6.3-magnitude earthquake on 27 May 2006, killing 5,782 people, injuring approximately 36,000 and leaving 600,000 people homeless. The region of Bantul suffered the most damage and deaths.
The Special Region is located near the southern coast of Java, surrounded on three sides by the province of Central Java, and with the Indian Ocean on the south side. The population at the 2010 Census was 3,452,390 people, but according to the latest official estimate (January 2014) has risen to 3,594,290. It has an area of 3,133.15 km2, making it the second-smallest area of the provinces in Indonesia, after the Jakarta Capital Region. Along with surrounding areas in Central Java, it has some of the highest population densities of Java.
Mount Merapi is located to the immediate north of the city of Yogyakarta and Sleman Regency. It is the most active volcano in Indonesia and has erupted regularly since 1548. It last erupted in October–November 2010, killing and injuring many people and temporarily displacing approximately 100,000 residents.
The Special Region of Yogyakarta (provincial level) is subdivided into four regencies (kabupaten) and one city (kota):
Located within the Special Region of Yogyakarta, the city of Yogyakarta is known as a center of classical Javanese fine art and culture such as batik, ballet, drama, music, poetry and puppet shows. It is also one of Indonesia's most renowned centers of higher education. At the city's center is the Sultan's palace called the kraton. While the city sprawls in all directions from the kraton, the core of the modern city is to the north.
Yogyakarta is served by Adisucipto International Airport. There are two train stations: Lempuyangan and Yogyakarta (also called Tugu station). Yogyakarta is considered one of the major hubs that links the west-east main railway route in Java island. To the south, in the Bantul region, is the Giwangan bus station, the largest bus station in Indonesia. The centre of metropolitan Yogyakarta is surrounded by a ring road.
Since 2008, the Special Region of Yogyakarta launched bus rapid transit system, the Trans Jogja, which connects many places in and around Yogyakarta city, including the airport and Prambanan temple.
Yogyakarta is home to more than 100 institutions of higher education in Indonesia, the highest number of higher education institutions of any province in Indonesia. Hence, Yogyakarta earned its nickname "Kota Pelajar" (The City of Students).
The Special Region is also the home of the first-established private university in Indonesia, the Islamic University of Indonesia, which was founded in 1945. The Indonesia Institute of Arts, the first-established university in fine arts, is also in the region. Other large universities include Gadjah Mada University, State Islamic University of Yogyakarta, Institute of Science & Technology AKPRIND in Yogyakarta, University of Sarjanawiyata Tamansiswa in Yogyakarta, Yogyakarta State University, Muhammadiyah University of Yogyakarta and Atma Jaya University in Yogyakarta. Yogyakarta also has the famous one of university in mining and energy sector in Indonesia there are Yogyakarta Universitas Pembangunan Nasional "Veteran" of Yogyakarta.
Indonesia has only geo-heritage sites in Yogyakarta Special Region. It has been declared by Geological Agency of the Energy and Natural Resources Ministry. The sites consists of 9 sites: Eosen limestone in Gamping (Sleman regency), pillow lava in Berbah (Sleman), pre-historic volcanic sediment in Candi Ijo, Prambanan (Sleman), sand dunes in Parangtritis Beach (Bantul regency), Kiskendo cave and former manganese mining site in Kleripan (Kulonprogo regency), the prehistoric volcano in Nglanggeran (Gunungkidul regency), Wediombo-Siung beaches (Gunungkidul) and Bioturbasi site in Kalingalang (Gunungkidul). The most unusual ones is pillow lava in Berbah (Sleman) which it is a big, rough black rock lays on the bank of narrow Dengkeng River. While the prehistoric volcano in Nglanggeran (Gunungkidul regency) has been already developed as a tourist destination with its beautiful scenery.
Candi Prambanan, The most Beautiful Hindu temple in the world
Candi Kalasan The oldest Buddhist relics in Yogyakarta
Kraton Ratu Boko, Impressive in a peaceful hill
Candi Ijo, The temple is the highest location in Yogyakarta
Candi Abang
Candi Gampingan
Candi Sari
Candi Kedulan
Candi Sambisari
Candi Sorogedug
Candi Kimpulan
Candi Gembirowati
Candi Klodangan
Candi Banyunibo
Candi Morangan
Candi Risan
Candi Palgading
Candi Watu Gudhig
Candi Dawangsari
Candi Miri
Candi Keblak
Candi Gebang
Candi Barong
Candi Pringtali
Candi Plembutan
Situs Mantup
Situs Payak
Situs Mangir
Situs Arca Bugisan
Situs Arca Gupolo
Situs Gua Sentono
Situs Sokoliman
Situs Gondangan
Situs Bleberan
Bantul 1
Pantai Parangtritis
Pantai Parangkusumo
Pantai Parangendok
Pantai Depok
Bantul 2
Pantai Samas
Pantai PandanSari /Patehan
Pantai Goa Cemara
Pantai Kuwaru
Pantai Baru
Pantai PandanSimo
Gunungkidul 1
Pantai Baron
Pantai Kukup
Pantai Drini/Pulau Drini
Pantai Watu Kodok
Pantai Sepanjang
Pantai Krakal
Pantai Sadranan
Pantai Sundak
Pantai Indrayanti
Pantai Slili
Gunungkidul 2
Pantai Pok Tunggal
Pantai Sadeng
Pantai Ngetun
Timang Beach
Pantai Jogan
Pantai Lambor
Siung Beach
Pantai Wediombo
Pantai Jungwo
Gunungkidul 3
Pantai Ngobaran
Pantai Ngrenehan
Pantai Butuh
Pantai Gesing
Pantai Wahkudu
Pantai Grigak
Kulonprogo
Pantai Glagah
Pantai Congot
Pantai Bugel
Pantai Trisik
Gua Banteng
Gua Banyaksongo
Gua Bribin
Gua Cemplong
Gua Cerme
Gua Cikal
Gua Dagang
Gua Dengok
Gua Gebang
Gua Gebangtinatar
Gua Grengseng
Gua Grubug
Gua Grubuk
Gua Jepang
Gua Jlamprong
Gua Jomblang
Gua Kali Suci
Gua Kaligede
Gua Kebon
Gua Kedokan
Gua Kesirat
Gua Kiskendo
Gua Langse
Gua Maria Jatiningsih
Gua Mariatritis
Gua Ngingrong
Gua Ngobaran
Gua Ngularan
Gua Nogosari
Gua Pari
Gua Pindul
Gua Ploso
Gua Rancang Kencono
Gua Rancang
Gua Selarong
Gua Semuluh
Gua Seropan
Gua Sigolo-golo
Gua Sioyot
Gua Slisi
Gua Sodong
Gua Sriti
Gua Sumurup
Gua Sunan Mas
Gua Sundak
Gua Tapan
Gua Toto
Malioboro
Pasar Beringharjo
XT Square
Kasongan
Pasar Seni Gabusan
Pasar tanaman hias dan satwa Pasti
Pasar Klithikan
Ambarukmo Plaza
Galeria Mall
Malioboro Mall
Ramai Mall
Saphir Square
Hartono Lifestyle Mall Jogja
Sahid Yogya Lifestyle City
Jogja City Mall
Wanagama
Kaliadem
Kaliurang
Air Terjun Sri Gethuk
Puncak Suroloyo
Gunung Nglanggeran
Lereng Merapi
Waduk Sermo
Kebun Binatang Gembira Loka
Istana Air Taman Sari
Monumen Jogja Kembali
Museum Keraton Yogyakarta
Museum Sonobudoyo
Pemakaman Imogiri
Kerajinan kulit Manding Bantul
Taman Pintar Yogyakarta (Tourism Education in the center of Yogyakarta)
Pemakaman Girigondo
Sendratari Ramayana Prambanan
Yogyakarta Special Region have signed sister province relationship/friendly ties agreement with region/state:
Kyoto Prefecture, Japan.
California, United States
Gyeongsangbuk-do, South Korea.
Tyrol, Austria
Chiang Mai Province], Thailand
List of cities in Indonesia
