Ureshino (嬉野市, Ureshino-shi) is a city located in the western part of Saga Prefecture on the island of Kyushu, Japan.
As of January 1, 2009, the city has an estimated population of 29,227 and a population density of 231 persons per km². The total area is 126.51 km².
The modern city of Ureshino was formed on January 1, 2006, by the merger of the former town of Ureshino, absorbing the town of Shiota (both from Fujitsu District). Ureshino is locally known for the green tea grown there and its hot spring resorts.
Saga Prefecture
Kashima
Takeo
Shiroishi
Nagasaki Prefecture
Hasami
Higashisonogi
Kawatana
Ōmura
1889-04-01 - The modern municipal system was established. The current city region is occupied by 6 villages (Gochōda, Higashiureshino, Kuma, Nishiureshino, Shiota and Yoshida).
1918-10-05 - Shiota was elevated to town status.
1929-04-22 - Nishiureshino was elevated to town status and was renamed Ureshino.
1933-04-01 - Higashiureshino was incorporated into Ureshino.
1955-04-01 - Yoshida was incorporated into Ureshino.
1956-09-01 - Gochōda and Kuma were incorporated into Shiota.
2006-01-01 - Ureshino absorbed Shiota to create Ureshino City.
Shiota Technical Senior High School
Ureshino Senior High School
Ōnohara Junior High School
Shiota Junior High School
Ureshino Junior High School
Yoshida Junior High School
Gochōda Elementary School
Kuma Elementary School
Ōkusano Elementary School
Ōnohara Elementary School
Shiota Elementary School
Todoroki Elementary School
Ureshino Elementary School
Yoshida Elementary School
The closest airports are Nagasaki Airport and Saga Airport.
There are no railway stations in Ureshino. The closest are Hizen-Kashima Station in Kashima and Takeo-Onsen Station in Takeo.
Expressways:
Nagasaki Expressway
Ureshino Interchange
National highways:
Route 34
Route 498
Prefectural roads:
Sasebo-Ureshino Route 1
Ōmura-Ureshino Route 6
Ureshino-Shiota Route 28
Kashima-Ureshino Route 41
Ureshino-Yamauchi Route 45
This amusement park is a reproduction of a town along the Nagasaki Kaido, a major route which ran through the region in the 17th century during the Edo Period. There are dramatic shows that include samurai, ninjas and princesses, shown on the weekends.
The city boasts some of the region's best onsen, including Shibasansou, Taishoya, and Warakuen. There are currently over 40 spas in the area, both indoor and outdoor, ranging in size and water quality. Tourists may purchase a discount spa ticket from the local Tourist Information Office, located at the Ureshino Highway Interchange.
Onsen water is used to make this delightful local dish. The alkaline in the water makes the bean curd in the tofu soft and mellow when it is heated in ceramic pots. Onsen tofu is traditionally served with condiments such as green onion, ginger, and sesame paste to taste.
Ureshino is an area surrounded by green tea fields, and is well known as one of the best green tea producers in Japan, as the method of tea production dates back to 1504, when it was first introduced from China during the Ming Dynasty. This tradition has been carried on today in the delicate aroma and flavour of the tea.
Takeo Onsen Health Road Race (嬉野温泉健康ロードレース大会)
Ureshino Attaka Festival (うれしのあったかまつり)
Ureshino Tea Mitto (うれしの茶ミット)
Oyama-san Festival (お山さんまつり)
Happy Carnival (うれしカーニバル)
Takeo Onsen Summer Festival (嬉野温泉夏まつり)
Hachiman Shrine Festival (八幡宮例祭)
Tanjō Shrine Shiota Kunchi (丹生神社例祭塩田くんち)
Hachiten Shrine Grand Festival (八天神社例大祭)
