Kushiro (釧路市, Kushiro-shi) is a Japanese city in Kushiro Subprefecture, Hokkaido, Japan. It is the capital city of Kushiro Subprefecture, as well as the most populous city in eastern Hokkaido.
An Imperial decree in July 1899 established Kushiro as an open port for trading with the United States and the United Kingdom.
Kushiro has been an important port because it is more reliably ice-free during winter than alternative Russian Far East warm-water ports such as Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky or other ports in Hokkaido such as Hakodate, which occasionally do freeze for short periods due to the lower salinity of the Sea of Japan. For this reason, Kushiro was considered a valuable target for the Tsars during the Russo-Japanese Wars, but it only became a really important port during the 1920s with the growth of commercial fishing, for which its reliable freedom from ice reduced costs.
On October 11, 2005 the town of Akan, from Akan District, and the town of Onbetsu, from Shiranuka District, was merged into Kushiro.
In 2008 the city had an estimated population of 189,539 and a total area of 1,362.75 km2 (526.16 sq mi), giving a population density of 140 persons per km² (363 persons per sq. mi.).
In addition to its port, Kushiro is serviced by Kushiro Airport with flights from Honshu and by the Super Ōzora limited express train service, which runs seven times per day to the main population centres in the west of Hokkaido.
Kushiro was accorded city status on 1 August 1922. It is the sister city of Burnaby, British Columbia; Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Russia; and Kholmsk, Russia.
1869 Kusuri becomes Kushiro.
1900 Kushiro becomes a First Class Municipality as Kushiro Town
1920 Kushiro Town becomes Kushiro-ku. Kushiro Village (now Town) splits off
1922 Kushiro-ku becomes Kushiro City
2005 Kushiro City, Akan Town, and Onbetsu Town merged to form the new city named Kushiro City
Mount Oakan
Mount Meakan
Mount Akan-Fuji
Kushiro River
Akan River
Shitakara River
Lake Akan
Lake Harutori
Late Panketō
Late Penketō
Late Shunkushitakara
Kushiro-shitsugen National Park
Akan National Park
Kushiro has a humid continental climate (Dfb) but its winter temperatures are less severe than those of inland East Asia at the same latitude. Its port is the most reliably ice-free throughout winter in all of Hokkaido, due to the lack of indentation in the coastline and absence of large inflows of cold fresh water nearby. It is also markedly sunnier than the extremely gloomy Kuril Islands to its north, being sheltered by Hokkaido's mountains from the heavy snowfalls produced on the Sea of Japan side by the Aleutian Low. It receives only a third as much snowfall as Sapporo and almost twice as much sunshine as the Kuril Islands are estimated to.
Hokkaido University of Education, Kushiro Campus
Kushiro Public University of Economics
Kushiro National College of Technology
Kushiro junior College
Hokkaido Kushiro Koryo High School
Hokkaido Kushiro Konan High School
Hokkaido Kushiro Meiki High School
Hokkaido Kushiro Commercial High School
Hokkaido Kushiro Technical High School
Hokkaido Akan High School
Hokkaido Kushiro Hokuyo High School
Bushukan High School
Ikegami Gakuen High School, Kushiro Campus
Kushiro Airport
Port of Kushiro
JR Hokkaido
Nemuro Main Line : Chokubetsu - Shakubetsu Station - Onbetsu - (Shiranuka, Hokkaido) - Otanoshike - Shin-Otanoshike - Shin-Fuji - Kushiro - Higashi-Kushiro - Musa
Senmō Main Line : Higashi-Kushiro
Taiheiyō Coal Services and Transportation Rinkō Line
Ice hockey is one of the most popular winter sports in Kushiro. In addition to several leagues devoted top amateur play of all ages, Kushiro is home to the Asia League Ice Hockey Nippon Paper Cranes, three time Asia League Champions.
Kushiro and many other cities are interested in hosting bandy teams.
Kazuhiko Chiba, football player
Yutaka Fukufuji, ice hockey goaltender
Yukinobu Hoshino, manga artist
Akira Ifukube, composer
Keisuke Itagaki, manga artist
Saori Kitakaze, sprinter
Satoshi Kon, anime film director
Luna H. Mitani, artist
Hiromi Nagakura, photographer
Maki Nomiya, singer of the Japanese band "Pizzicato Five"
Shinji Somai, film director
Kazuro Watanabe, astronomer
Aina Takeuchi, ice hockey defenseman with Calgary Inferno
 Yuzawa, Akita, Japan (since 1963)
 Tottori, Tottori, Japan (since 1963)
 Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada (since 1965)
 Kholmsk, Kholmsky District, Sakhalin Oblast, Russia (since 1975)
 Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Kamchatka Krai, Russia (since 1998)
