Yamatotakada (大和高田市, Yamatotakada-shi) is a city located in Nara Prefecture, Japan.
As of January 1, 2007, the city has an estimated population of 65,174 and 29,533 households. The population density is 4,399.87 persons per km², and the total area is 16.48 km².
The city continues to develop as a local business and government center in the center of Nara Prefecture.
Inhabited since the Paleolithic age, the city area nurtured paddy field agriculture in the fertile Nara Basin since ancient times. Large keyhole type burial mounds (kofun) were constructed in the northwestern part of the city around the 5th century.
A local samurai family ruled the area in the medieval age, but the lord of Takada perished in 1580 at the hand of a local vassal of the powerful Oda Nobunaga. In the early modern age, the city area developed as a local market town with a big Buddhist temple at its core.
With the introduction of Western civilisation into Japan, a modern spinning factory was set up here at the end of the nineteenth century. Since then, the city became a center of the modern textile industry.
After the Second World War, Takada was designated as a city in 1948. In 1963, the city of Yamatotakada was established, through the arrangement of an Australian Catholic father, a sister-city relationship with Lismore, New South Wales, Australia. It is known as the first such relationship between the two countries.
Toshiharu Matsuda, who served as mayor of the city since 1992, resigned in 2003. During his terms of office he executed ambitious construction plans resulting in burdensome borrowings. He was also criticized for his connection with a gangster boss in the city of Nara. Masakatsu Yoshida, elected as new major in April, 2003, has had to cope with the deteriorating financial problems combined with a curtailed national subsidy and mounting unpaid city tax.
A citizens' group advocates new friendship relation with Jiujiang, Jiangxi Province in central China, though city administrators are still reluctant.
Nara Prefecture
Kashihara
Gose
Kashiba
Katsuragi
Kōryō
 Lismore, Australia
Primary Schools
Takada Elementary School
Iwasono Elementary School
Katashio Elementary School
Ukiana Elementary School
Ukiananishi Elementary School
Junior High Schools
Takada Junior High School
Takadanishi Junior High School
Katashio Junior High School
High Schools
Takada High School
Takadahigashi High School
Nara Culture High School
Japan Aviation High School
Takada Commerce High School
Universities
Nara Culture Women's Junior College
Other
Bigei Gakuen Vocational School
Apollo Gakuin Fashion Business School
West Japan Railway Company
Wakayama Line; Sakurai Line (Manyō-Mahoroba Line): Takada Station
Kintetsu Corporation
Osaka Line: Tsukiyama Station-Yamato-Takada Station-Matsuzuka Station
Minami-Osaka Line: Takadashi Station-Ukiana Station
Expressways
Keinawa Expressway
Japan National Route 24
Japan National Route 165
Japan National Route 166
Japan National Route 168
