La Pobla Llarga (Valencian pronunciation: [la ˈpɔβla ˈʎaɾɣa], Spanish: Puebla Larga [ˈpweβla ˈlaɾɣa]) is a municipality in the comarca of Ribera Alta in the Valencian Community, Spain. Well known of the orange growth and its flourishing commerce in the 19th and 20th centuries. Currently, its inhabitants live basically on agriculture and the service sector.
Public transport is provided by the Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat Valenciana (FGV). Is well connected by Cercanías Valencia, the commuter rail service that serves Valencia, Spain and its metropolitan area. It is operated by Cercanías Renfe, the commuter rail division of RENFE, the former monopoly of rail services in Spain. The network is owned by Adif, the national railway infrastructure company. La Pobla Llarga Railway Station utilices the radial line C-2. to/from the city centre. From The North station (Valencia) it's the eight parade after Alfafar-Benetusser station, Catarroja station, Silla station, Benifaió-Almusafes station, Algemesí station, Alcira station, Carcagente station and finally Pobla Llarga station. Train service from the village to Valencia is every 20 minutes
The village is well connected by car. The easiest way to reach Pobla Llarga from the city of Valencia through the A-7 and then CV-564
With a population near 4.500, Pobla Llaga has a public school's Doctor Sanchis Guarner, Pere d' Esplugues High School  and Colegio Santa Ana,a mixed private school which teaches as the presence of various languages (English, Catalan and Spanish). The village also has a music school (Unió Musical La Pobla Llarga)
The village has the Centre de salut La pobla Llarga (Medical Center) and is near of Alcira Hospital and Hospital Lluís Alcanyís de Xàtiva
Antigua Alquería y necrópolis. Dating to the Arabic times
Cruz del Término (Creu de Terme), gotical style 13th century
Pont de l’Ase
Ayuntamiento, 14th century.
Iglesia Parroquial.
Casa Miñana
Casa del Baró de santa Bàrbera
Plaça de la Mare de Déu dels Desemparats, built by Silvestre d' Edeta,
Magatzem Ballester  built in 1930 has an eclecticism and Modernisme and style 
Cinema Monterrey, built in 1950 by architect Juan Guardiola Martinez (1895-1962), a student of Antoni Gaudí who is best known for designing Barcelona's House Xinesa.
Mercat, a Modernisme architecture
Each year the village holds a celebration in honor of San Caxlit and the Moors and Christians. On October 2010 Vincent Pérez opened their holiday festivities.
David Bernabéu, a Spanish professional road bicycle racer.
David Albelda, is a Spanish retired footballer who played as a defensive midfielder. A Spanish international in the 2000s, Albelda gained 51 caps for the country, representing it in two World Cups and at Euro 2004.
Vincent Perez, known internationally for playing the title character Ashe Corven in The Crow: City of Angels, and for starring in Queen of the Damned, playing Marius de Romanus. Some of his notable films in French cinema include Cyrano de Bergerac, Le Bossu, La Reine Margot and Indochine.
