Bor (Serbian Cyrillic: Бор) is a town and municipality located in eastern Serbia, with one of the largest copper mines in Europe - RTB Bor. It has been a mining center since 1904, when a French company began operations there. It is the administrative center of the Bor District of Serbia. The population of the town is 34,160, while municipality has 48,615.
The name is derived from the Serbian word Bor (Бор), meaning "pine".
Bor is surrounded by many beautiful places such as Banjsko Polje, the spa-town Brestovačka Banja, the lake Borsko Jezero, and the mountain Stol, and it is very close to the mountain Crni Vrh.
Neolithic Bubanj-Salkuca culture ceramics and anthropomorphic-zoomorphic figurines were found in Krivelj.
In 1903 the mine of Bor was opened which was important moment for the development of Bor. The poet Miklós Radnóti wrote here some of the most beautiful poems ever written in Hungarian during his forced labour (1944) in the copper mines.
During World War II, the copper mines were under German rule, and an internment and labor camp was established at the site. During the period, roughly 6,000 people were imprisoned at the camp and worked at the copper mines. The prisoners were mostly of Jewish descent, as well as Sabbatarians and Jehovah's Witnesses. Later on, shortly before WWII ended, the mines were evacuated, with most of the prisoners executed.
In 1947 Bor officially had a town status - at the time its population was 11,000.
Aside from the town of Bor, the municipality includes the following settlements:
Copper mining, mainly of the biggest employer RTB Bor, is the key basis of the Bor's economy.
In 2011, the average gross monthly wage in the city of Bor was US$730 (€540, 54649 RSD, 944 NZD) - As of August 2011  This average monthly wage is set to receive a large increase as soon as the modernizing of RTB Bor begins (including the flow-on effects, i.e. Further business investment in the city, etc.)
Technical Faculty of Bor is a faculty of the University of Belgrade, with tradition dating back to 1961. The Faculty was accredited as a scientific-research organisation in the area of technical-technological science in 2007. So far 1804 students graduated at this faculty, in addition to 18 students that completed specialist studies, 122 master studies and 70 students that defended doctoral theses.
On 16 December 2010, it was officially announced that from 2011 in this city will start Troicki's Tennis Academy, which will carry his name "Viktor Troicki". The Academy will cover 12,000 square meters, close to five-stars hotel "Jezero". Troicki said that he will use every free moment to stay in Bor, especially to spend time in his academy.
Sport Center Bor (Serbian: Спортски центар Бор/Sportski centar Bor) is an indoor sporting arena. The capacity of the arena is 3,000 people for seating, and 4,000 with the ground. It is currently home to the KK Bor basketball team.
Under the auspices of the Public Utility "Sportski Centar Bor" is the Bor Airport, with paved runway, used only for sporting events.
Seats in the municipality parliament won in the 2010 local elections: [2]
United Regions of Serbia, Socialdemocratic party - Mlađan Dinkić (10)
Za evropski Bor (For European Bor) - DS, SPO,VDS, DHSS (7)
"Promene za Bor (Changes for Bor) - Tomislav Nikolić" - SNS, NS, Pokret socijalista, GG "Vlasi Krajine", GG "Vlaški pokret ujedinjenja" (7)
Socijalistička partija Srbije - Partija udruženih penzionera Srbije- Jedinstvena Srbija- Ivica Dačić (5)
"Jedinstveni za Bor (United for Bor) - dr Predrag Balašević" - VDSS, Romska partija (2)
Liberalno - demokratska partija - Čedomir Jovanović (2)
Demokratska stranka Srbije - Vojislav Koštunica (2)
Bor is one of the municipalities with the most different nations of people living in. Total of 32 different nationalities are represented among the population of Bor.
According to the 2002 census, the settlements in the Bor municipality with Serb ethnic majority were: Bor, Brestovac, Donja Bela Reka, and Oštrelj. The settlements with Vlach ethnic majority were: Bučje, Gornjane, Krivelj, Luka, Metovnica, Tanda, Topla, and Šarbanovac. Ethnically mixed settlements were: Zlot (relative Serb majority) and Slatina (relative Vlach majority).
In the 2011 census, the population of the Bor municipality numbered 48,615 residents, while the city had 34,160 residents. The number of residents has dropped over the years since air pollution by RTB Bor has caused many people to leave the town.
Ethnic composition of the municipality:
Bor is twinned with:
 Bar, Montenegro
 Le Creusot, France
 Khmelnytskyi, Ukraine
 Kitwe, Zambia
 Vratsa, Bulgaria
List of places in Serbia
FK Bor
Bor Airport
