The 2007–08 Liga I was the ninety season of Liga I, the top-level football league of Romania. Season began on 27 July 2007 and ended on 7 May 2008. CFR Cluj became champions, winning their first trophy and ending a 17-year-long reign of Bucharest based teams.
CFR Cluj will play in the Champions League group stage, while Steaua Bucureşti qualified for the Champions League third qualifying round. Rapid Bucureşti, Dinamo Bucureşti, Unirea Urziceni and Politehnica Ştiinţa Timişoara qualified for the UEFA Cup first round. The highest placed team that has not qualified for the UEFA Cup is allowed the opportunity to compete in the third round of the UEFA Intertoto Cup, provided they have applied to enter the Intertoto Cup in the next season. Vaslui, Oţelul Galaţi and Gloria Bistriţa are the only teams that have applied, with Vaslui securing their participation.
.
Source: LT (Romanian)
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal difference; 4) head-to-head goals scored; 5) goal difference; 6) number of goals scored
notes(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Head-to-Head: used when head-to-head record is used to rank tied teams.
Source: LT (Romanian)
Source: LT (Romanian)
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
Source: LPF (Romanian)
(1) Delta Tulcea won the first serie of Liga II, but did not apply for the license necessary for playing in Liga I in the 2007-08 season. The highest ranked relegated team in the previous season, namely Ceahlăul Piatra Neamţ (15th place in 2006-07 season), will continue in Liga I.(2) Timişoara change of name following name conflict with FC Politehnica Timișoara.
