Mladenovac (Serbian Cyrillic: Младеновац, pronounced [mlâde̞nɔ̝v̞at͡s]) is a town and one of 17 city municipalities which constitute the City of Belgrade, the capital of Serbia. In 2003 the town had total population of 23,314.
Its name stems from word "youth" in Serbian language. After the legend the emergence of the name is brought in connection with a man named Mladen, who established himself after the battle on the Kosovo in 1389 with his two brothers in this desert area. The brothers separated and the place, where Mladen had established himself, was called Mladenovac.
The first official data over a settlement in this area are mentioned in the Ottoman census of 1528. To the community of the Belgrade urban district Mladenovac belongs since 1971. The day of the urban district is 2 August, when Mladenovac was explained in the year 1893 as the town.
This town, situated about 47 km (29.20 mi) in the south of Belgrade, is a part of the district of the capital city of Serbia. Together with the suburban settlements Kovačevac, Koraćica, Markovac, Jagnjilo, Senaja, Granice, Velika Krsna, Dubona, Šepšin, Velika Ivanča, Rajkovac, Selo Mladenovac, Rabrovac, Amerić, Vrbica the municipality of Mladenovac extends over 339 km2 (130.89 sq mi) and has 53,050 inhabitants.
Suburban:
Kosmaj with its altitude of 628 m is the highest point in this region. On the top of this mountain there is a monument in remembrance to the numerous Serbs (Partizans) who have fallen during World War II battles in this area.
Between the city central and the mountain Kosmaj you can find a monastery "Tresije", which was built in the 13th century.
Mladenovac is also a crossing point of many trading and transporting routes such as Belgrade, Kragujevac, Aranđelovac, Smederevo, Smederevska Palanka.
Most of the inhabitants of Mladenovac are working in the industrial factories. Keramika, Petar Drapšin, Progres, Minel trafo, Elektrošumadija, Cobest, Makovica and are counting to the biggest companies of this part of Serbia.
The biggest primary school is "Momcilo Zivojinovic" with over 2000 pupils. Second in size is "Sveti Sava" primary school. There is also a primary school "Kosta Đukić" in Mladenovac. Also in Mladenovac exist 8 primary schools and 2 secondary schools. It has a long history, educating many pupils and having many teachers work in it. Every one of them left a trace in the school's history. The primary school Kosta Đukić was founded in 1968. Its pupils have shown very good results in mathematics, chemistry, and physics. It is one of three town’s schools in Mladenovac and its nearby Selters Institute for Rehabilitation. This school has also classes in villages Međulužje, Pružatovac, Markovac, Koraćica, and Velika Ivanča. The school in Koraćica has existed for over 150 years. The school is very successful in many fields. Its pupils in recent years have shown good results in various republic and national competitions. The school also has a lot of playgrounds for basketball, football, etc. The Grammar School in Mladenovac is very successful in Serbian and history, especially in republic competitions.
Subdivisions of Belgrade
List of Belgrade neighborhoods and suburbs
