Hirtshals is a town and seaport on the coast of Skagerrak on the island of Vendsyssel-Thy at the top of the Jutland peninsula in northern Denmark, Europe. It is located in Hjørring municipality in Region Nordjylland. The town of Hirtshals has a population of 5,959 (1 January 2014). Located on the Skagerrak, it is especially known for its fishing and ferry harbours.
The town of Hirtshals developed around the artificial harbour which was constructed between 1919 and 1931. In 1925, the Hjørring-Hirtshals railway line opened to link the port of Hirtshals with the Danish rail network. In 1966, the harbour was expanded and became one of the largest fishing ports in Denmark.
Until January 1, 2007, Hirtshals was also the seat of Hirtshals Municipality which was merged with existing Hjørring, Løkken-Vrå, and Sindal municipalities to form an enlarged Hjørring Municipality.
Hirtshals is located on the sand and clay promontory Hirtshals, overlooking the Skagerrak between the Jammer Bay and the Tannis Bay. The shoreline is backed by low cliffs, beneath which is a narrow and rocky beach.
The town's 35 metre high lighthouse, Hirtshals fyr, is a local landmark. Building was begun on June 28th, 1860, and it was first lit on January 1st, 1863. It is constructed of red brick, and covered with Dutch tile.
The sea level has been as high as 1 meter over the norm. But in days where there is no wind, the waves typically won't be higher than max 20 cm (8 in) over normal sea level.
Due to the proximity of the town to the coast, sea fog is not an uncommon occurrence. In the winter, the air temperature can fall as low as 1.6 degrees, but in the summer, it can reach over 25 degrees Celsius.
Hirtshals Havnekontor (Hirtshals' Harbor Office) keeps track of wave periods. On yearly basis wave periods fluctuate between half a second, up to about 9 seconds. According to Hirtshals Havnekontor (Hirtshals' Harbor Office) normal wave heights are between 2 and 2.5 meters.
The prevailing wind in Hirtshals is to the south or south-west. Wind speeds vary all year long, usually topping at 10 m/s during the winter.
Fishing plays a big role for the town and its inhabitants, as does tourism and the renting of summer homes. Due to the ferry connections with Norway, the shops in Hirtshals thrive on the large number of visitors, especially Norwegians, who shop in the small town all year long.
It is the home of one of the largest aquariums in Europe, the Nordsøen Oceanarium. This was built in 1984 as Nordsømuseet, The North Sea Museum,and got its present name after it was extended in 1998 to include a fish tank containing 4,5 million litres of water, making it the largest in northern Europe. The Oceanarium has 70 different species in its collection. A fire in December 2003 destroyed the new extension, but the Nordsøen Oceanarium was rebuilt and reopened on July 22, 2005.
Hirtshals is the Danish terminal for the services of the Norwegian ferry company, Color Line. Each year thousands of Norwegian, German and Dutch tourists travel back and forth between Hirtshals and the Norwegian cities of Kristiansand and Larvik. Previously, Color Line also offered services to Bergen, Stavanger and Oslo, but decided to stop operating these routes in early 2008. Another ferry operator, Fjord Line, now operates a route to Bergen and Stavanger. It has also been possible since autumn 2010 to travel to Tórshavn on the Faroe Islands and to Seyðisfjörður on Iceland with Smyril Line.
The Hirtshals Line connects Hirtshals with Hjørring and the Danish rail network. Hirtshals station is the principal railway station of the town. The town is also served by the railway halts Lilleheden and Emmersbæk.
Skaga FM, formerly known as Radio Hirtshals, is a local radio station that plays domestic and foreign hits from the 80's, 90's and onwards, and reports on current events happening within the municipality of Hjørring. MHz: 105,6 FM.
[1] The Skaga FM official website (Mainly in Danish, but offers German tourist radio during the summer)
Since the early year 2010, local ferry operator Color Line (serves two ferry routes between Hirtshals and Norway) have had their own radio station, Color Radio, that plays popular songs from mostly the 80's and 90's. It also gives travelers from Hirtshals to Norway information about the next departure, and when check-in closes. The radio can be listened to all over Hirtshals town, and from the motorway roundabout near Aabyen at the E39. MHz: 95,3 FM.
