Daniel Márcio Fernandes (born 25 September 1983) is a Portuguese Canadian professional footballer who plays for American club Rayo OKC as a goalkeeper.
The son of a Portuguese father and a Czechoslovakian mother, Fernandes was born in Edmonton, Alberta, being raised in East Vancouver, British Columbia. His first club was the Vancouver Olympics.
In 2000, aged 17, Fernandes returned to the land of his father and joined FC Porto's youth system. In his first two years as a senior he only managed to appear for the reserves, his second club being Celta de Vigo B in Spain.
In January 2003, the Galicians loaned Fernandes to Regionalliga Süd side SSV Jahn Regensburg, but again failed to appear officially for the main squad, returning in June to Celta and being released from contract.
After a successful trial, Fernandes signed with Greek club PAOK FC, playing in just four top division games in his first two seasons combined. In 2005, the team's general manager – and former player – Giorgos Kostikos took over the team's fortunes, after coach Nikos Karageorgiou was sacked following a bad string of results. He immediately replaced ageing Kyriakos Tohouroglou in his starting XI with the Portuguese.
Despite many problems both inside and outside the pitch, PAOK managed to finish in sixth place in the 2005–06 season, with Fernandes appearing in 27 matches as the Thessaloniki club qualified to the UEFA Cup, only to be disqualified shortly after for irregularities. He remained first-choice for the remainder of his spell.
On 23 May 2008, after extensive negotiations, PAOK accepted an offer from VfL Bochum, who signed Fernandes for a fee of approximately €1.2 million, with the player reuniting at the German side with former teammate Marcin Mięciel.
Fernandes made his Bundesliga debut on 16 August, in a 0–1 away loss against Karlsruher SC. He only missed three league contests in his first season, as the North Rhine-Westphalia team retained top division status after finishing 14th.
In 2009–10 Fernandes was relegated to the bench by Philipp Heerwagen and, on 18 January 2010, he was loaned to Iraklis Thessaloniki F.C. until the end of the campaign. In the summer, in the same predicament, he signed with another Greek side, Panathinaikos FC, who retained an option to buy.
In January 2011, yet on loan, Fernandes moved to Panserraikos FC, appearing sparingly in an eventual top level relegation and being released by Bochum in June.
On 16 August 2011, Fernandes joined Romania's CFR Cluj. He was released after only five months, in which he played in just two games.
Fernandes moved teams and countries again on 17 January 2012, signing a two-year contract with FC Twente in the Eredivisie and competing with Nikolay Mihaylov for the no.1 position. He spent the following seasons on loan, with OFI Crete and Panthrakikos FC.
On 3 August 2015, Fernandes moved to the San Antonio Scorpions on loan from Twente. After the former ceased operations following the 2015 NASL season, he joined manager Alen Marcina as both signed with Rayo OKC on 2 February 2016.
Fernandes gained caps for Canada at under-20 level. He then changed to play for the country of his father, Portugal, and made his under-21 debut in 2006.
Fernandes received his first senior call-up in November 2006, as third goalkeeper behind Ricardo and Quim. In May of the following year, he was selected for a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifier against Belgium and a friendly with Kuwait, making his debut in the latter after replacing Quim in the 66th minute of a 1–1 draw.
In February 2009, Fernandes played his second international match, substituting Eduardo at the hour-mark of a 1–0 win against Finland. In May 2010 he was named in the 23-man squad for that year's FIFA World Cup, but did not play in the tournament in South Africa.
