Mejicanos is a San Salvador suburb in the San Salvador department of El Salvador.
Mejicanos is a city located in San Salvador, El Salvador. At the 2009 estimate it had 160,751 inhabitants. It has been characterized by its typical food "Yuca Frita con Merienda".
It has a municipal market, where the local citizens can buy groceries, vegetables, dairy products, meat, pupusas, etc. Many of the things available in the local market are produced in the surrounding villages, like vegetables.
It is located in a strategic point because is in the main route to other towns or municipalities, like Cuscatancingo, Mariona, San Ramon, San Salvador, etc. However it has-single lane roads, which accounts for the frequent traffic jams in the center of the city.
It has always been characterized by being a disorganized city, like other cities in El Salvador. Even though it has a municipal market people use the streets to sell their products.
Because the average altitude of the city is around 600 meters above sea level, the climate is typically warm, although the local citizen are used to that.
As of February 2007 many bus routes go though Mejicanos.
Route 32 goes from San Salvador's downtown (El Centro) to La Montreal (Although is Avenida Montreal is well known just for La Montreal).
Route 23 goes from San Salvador's downtown (El Centro) to San Ramón.
Route 6 goes from San Salvador's downtown (El Centro) to Mariona.
Route 24 goes from San Salvador's downtown (El Centro) to Cuscatancingo.
Route 33 goes from San Salvador's downtown (El Centro) to Canton San Roque(El Pito).
In 1524, the Spanish conquered and colonized the territory of Cuscatlán, now El Salvador. Indigenous friends and aborigines (Tlaxcaltecas, Aztecs, and Acolhuas) from the valley of Anahuac, a Mexican territory, arrived with them.After conquering the land, they settled north of the capital, were known as “Mexicans”and founded three core groups: one group was to the north, which is now San Salvador, where the City of Mejicanos is located, second is Barrio de Sonsonate, and third was Usulután, today Canton Santa Maria.
The city’s first named was “Villa of Mejicanos”, and it later became the “City of Mejicanos. In February 7, 1823, General Vicente Filisola following orders of Mexican Imperial Army, battled against Salvadorian Republic Army, Colonel Antonio Jose Cañas, substitute for Commander Manuel José Arce, who became ill. The Salvadorians were opposing the unconditional territory takeover by the Government of Emperor Augustín de Iturbide. Unsuccessful,Iturbide surrendered ambitions for the annexations of the Mexicans. Later, the City of Mejicanos stood out for its trade of goods in the streets among farmers.
