Suzhou (Chinese: 宿州; pinyin: Sùzhōu) formerly romanized as Suchow is a prefecture-level city in northern Anhui province. It borders the prefectural cities of Huaibei and Bengbu to the southwest and south respectively, the provinces of Jiangsu to the east, Shandong to the north, and Henan to the northwest.
Its population was 5,352,924 inhabitants at the 2010 census whom 1,647,642 lived in the built-up area (or metro) made of Yongqiao urban district, even though it stays largely rural.
Suzhou was formerly Su County (simplified Chinese: 宿县; traditional Chinese: 宿縣; pinyin: Sù Xiàn).
Suzhou administers five county-level divisions, including one district and four counties.
Yongqiao District (埇桥区)
Dangshan County (砀山县)
Xiao County (萧县)
Lingbi County (灵璧县)
Si County (泗县)
These are further divided into 118 township-level divisions.
Suzhou has a monsoon-influenced, humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cwa), with four distinct seasons. Winters are cold and damp, with average low temperatures in January dipping just below freezing; the January 24-hour average temperature is 0.8 °C (33.4 °F). Summers are typically hot and humid, with a July average of 27.3 °C (81.1 °F). The annual mean is 14.73 °C (58.5 °F), while annual precipitation averages about 840 millimetres (33 in), a majority of which occurs from May to August.
Sacrifice to The Kitchen God (祭灶)
This festival is the traditional lunar festival of East Asia, celebrated in Suzhou. People think this festival is to give presents to God. In Suzhou, this festival is celebrated by offering food and burning incense on a table and white wine on the floor to worship the gods. This food is left untouched for, more or less, one day. Also, some food is shared with family and friends.
Pear Flower Festival (梨花节)
There are many pear trees in Suzhou and when their flowers bloom people get together to appreciate it and have a picnic. At night there is a festival program on Anhui TV to show how beautiful it is.
Sacred Stone Festival(奇石节)
Suzhou Lingbi Sacred Stone Festival aims to promote the charming and admirable Lingbi sculptures. This festival expands the economy, promotes the cooperation and exchane, sets up an investment promotion platform, promotes Suzhou economic and social development, enhances its visibility and reputation. People get together and show their unique and beautiful stones. You can enjoy them at the Suzhou QiShi Museum. The city mayor chooses the best one to be sent to the National Museum of China.
