Mianzhu (simplified Chinese: 绵竹; traditional Chinese: 綿竹; pinyin: Miánzhú) is a county-level city of Deyang, Sichuan province in Southwest China.
It has an area of 1,245 square kilometers (481 sq mi) and a population of 510,000 in 2004. The city was heavily damaged during the 2008 Sichuan earthquake. Fuxin No. 2 Primary School collapsed.
Mianzhu has 19 towns and 2 townships:
Jiannan (剑南镇)
Dongbei (东北镇)
Xi'nan (西南镇)
Xinglong (兴隆镇)
Jiulong (九龙镇)
Zhundao (遵道镇)
Hanwang(汉旺镇)
Gongxing (拱星镇)
Tumen (土门镇)
Guangji (广济镇)
Jinhua (金花镇)
Yuquan (玉泉镇)
Banqiao (板桥镇)
Xinshi (新市镇)
Xiaode (孝德镇)
Fuxin (富新镇)
Qitian (齐天镇)
Shidi (什地镇)
Mianyuan (绵远镇)
Qingping (清平乡)
Tianchi (天池乡)
Mianzhu is a symbolic place presenting the south-west cities which produce lots of special products, such as the peal from Jiulong Mountain, a branch of Longmen Mountain. One of the most well-known wines around the country, even the world, is Jian Nan Chun,s kind of traditionally Chinese spirit with a history of 500 years. The quote of this company is "what you drink today is what was the Tang Dynasty Palace spirit". The value of JNC' products was at least above 3 million RMB each year. After 2008, in which year the big earthquake happened,the amount have been decreasing to 80 billion since numerous fundamental spirit used to season the taste was lost. Except this famous spirit factory, a dozen of relative smaller companies still work well, Jin Qi FU included.
Mianzhu New Year Painting is one of the four greatest New Year Paintings in China. Putting New Year Paintings on the front doors of a house is one of many traditional ways to celebrate Chinese Spring Festival in many parts of China. In one such painting, the artists use water colors to draw figures like Fu Wa, wishing the little boy could bring fortune and good luck to the entire family in the coming year. Recently, some New Year Painting workshops in Mianzhu are opened to the visitors and general public so that they could have a closer look at the entire process of how artists are actually making the New Year Painting.
Mianzhu is a sister city to Greensburg, Kansas, USA.
