Koksijde (French: Coxyde, West Flemish: Koksyde) is a town and a municipality in Belgium. It is located on the North Sea coast in the southwest of the Flemish province of West Flanders.
The municipality comprises apart from Koksijde, the villages of Oostduinkerke, St-Idesbald and Wulpen.
On January 1, 2006, Koksijde municipality had a total population of 21,269 on a total area of 43.96 km², which gives a population density of 484 inhabitants per km².
Since 1995 Marc Vanden Bussche has been mayor of Koksijde.
The municipality of Koksijde comprises the "deelgemeenten" Koksijde, Oostduinkerke, Sint-Idesbald and Wulpen.
The old town centre of Koksijde is located about two kilometers from the shoreline. Close by the sea, a new tourist centre, Koksijde-bad, has developed. A bit to the west on the territory is the hamlet of Sint-Idesbald. The old town centre of Oostduinkerke is located more than one kilometer from the coastline as well, with Oostduinkerke-bad close to the sea. Over 4 kilometers inland is the rural polder village of Wulpen.
The museum of the historical Abbey of Ten Duinen is set in a modern building, explaining the religious and cultural importance of this abbey throughout history and showing the daily life of Cistercian monks from the early Middle Ages, beginning in 1107 till the death of the last monk in 1833. The archeological site has been restored, and is open to the public. The attic of the museum contains a remarkable collection of liturgical silver ware.
The British Military Cemetery (1940–1945) bears witness to British sacrifices in the Battle of Dunkirk.
The Paul Delvaux museum in St-Idesbald houses the largest collection of paintings from this Belgian surrealist painter in the world.
The annual Duinencross Koksijde cyclo-cross race, part of the UCI Cyclo-cross World Cup, takes place in the municipality. In 1994 and 2012 the UCI Cyclo-cross World Championships were held here.
Koksijde operates the Koksijde Golf ter Hille golf club.
Koksijde Air Base
 Albina, Suriname.
