Ji'an (Chinese: 吉安; pinyin: Jí'ān) is a prefecture-level city situated in the central region of Jiangxi province of the People's Republic of China while bordering Hunan province to the west. It has an area of 25,219 km2 (9,737 sq mi) and as of the 2010 census, had a population of 4,810,339, of whom 538,699 live in the built-up (or metro) area made of 2 urban districts. Ji'an lies next to the Luoxiao Mountains (罗霄山脉) with the Gan River (赣江) running through the middle of the city. Local dialects include a form of Gan Chinese (Jicha subgroup, 吉茶片) as well as Hakka Chinese.
Ji'an is an abbreviation of its original name Jítàimínān (吉泰民安). It has also formerly been known as Luling (廬陵) and Jizhou (吉州).
The Ji'an municipal region comprises two districts: Jizhou and Qingyuan; a county-level city: Jinggangshan (井冈山市); and ten counties listed below:
Yongxin (永新县)
Anfu (安福县)
Xingan (新干县)
Xiajiang (峡江县)
Yongfeng (永丰县)
Jishui (吉水县)
Ji'an (吉安县)
Taihe (泰和县)
Wan'an (万安县)
Suichuan (遂川县)
Ji'an has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cfa) affected by the East Asian monsoon, with long, humid, very hot summers and cool and drier winters with occasional cold snaps. The monthly 24-hour average temperature ranges from 6.5 °C (43.7 °F) in January to 29.5 °C (85.1 °F) in July, with an annual average of 18.40 °C (65.1 °F). The average annual precipitation is 1,520 mm (60 in). With monthly percent possible sunshine ranging from 19% in March to 59% in July, the city receives 1,641 hours of bright sunshine annually. Winter begins somewhat sunny and dry but becomes progressively wetter and cloudier; spring begins especially gloomy, and from April to June each of the months averages more than 210 mm (8.3 in) of rainfall. After the heavy rains subside in June, summer is especially sunny. Autumn is warm and relatively dry.
Jinggangshan Airport in Taihe County serves Ji'an. The Beijing-Kowloon Railway line passes through the Ji'an municipality with train stations in Xingan, Xiajiang, Jishui, Ji'an (Qingyuan District), and Taihe. Ji'an is connected to the China National Highways 105 and 319.
Jinggangshan University is located in Qingyuan District, Ji'an.
The Ji'an Public Library (吉安市图书馆) serves the city.
Ouyang Xiu (欧阳修), a statesman, historian, poet and essayist of the Song Dynasty.
Wen Tianxiang (文天祥), a scholar and general during the latter days of the Southern Song Dynasty.
Yang Wanli (杨万里), one of the "four masters" of poetry of the Southern Song Dynasty.
Hu Quan (胡铨), essayist and one of the four grand ministers of the Southern Song Dynasty.
Zhou Bida (周必大), a left prime minister during the Southern Song Dynasty.
Luo Hongxian (羅洪先), a Ming Dynasty cartographer.
Xiao Gang, former deputy governor of the People's Bank of China.
