Öllingen is a town in the district of Alb-Donau in Baden-Württemberg in Germany. Öllingen on the southern slope of the Swabian Alb , in the northern Alb Danube county, is about 18 km northeast of Ulm. Öllingen located on 526m above sea level between the Lone Valley in the north and the Danube valley with the Langenauer basin in the south.
Located on the southern slope of the Flächenalb Langenauer pool, Öllingen is a rural structured village which was dominated by agriculture, weaving and by the degradation of sand on the nearby Sandberg. During the last decades, the village has converted into a residential community with several farms and craft workshops. The most striking landmarks of the community are all highly visible Ulrich church and the water tower. The boundaries of the municipality covers an area of 809 hectares. With 531 inhabitants (31 December 2012) Öllingen belongs to the group of the 30 smallest independent municipalities in Baden-Württemberg.
Öllingen-Church tower with sundial
Öllinger Crest: On a red background is a upright silver (white) lion holding a silver (white) high cross in the front paws. The silver lion on a red background is derived from the coat of arms of the Counts of Dillingen. These have the local Fronhof and a quarter of the local church handed over to the monastery Anhausen an der Brenz in 1143. The cross bears the lion in its paws suggests the relationship to the monastery Anhausen. At the same time, it is considered an indication of historical relations to the Chorherrenstift Wiesensteig. This Emperor Ludwig the Bavarian had passed the patronage of Öllinger church in 1330. The coat of arms was awarded the municipality by the state government on 21 February 1955, the flag of the District Office on October 1, 1984.
The municipality is bordered to the north by the town Herbrechtingen district Bissingen in Heidenheim district , to the east by Rammingen , on the south by the town Langenau and in the west on Nerenstetten and Setzingen.
Öllingen was documented, later mentioned in 1143 for the first time under the name Elingen, later Ellingen and belonged to the monastery Anhausen. By Excavations in 2002 it was demonstrated that there was a settlement in 2000 BC on the Sandberg. In addition, the Bockstein cave located in the Lone Valley was used by Stone Age hunters. In the 13th century Öllingen belonged to rule of Albeck and was bundled with Albeck 1383 at Ulm. The basic property of the municipality was sold since the 14th century to the imperial city, which meant that in 1790 the imperial city was almost the sole landowner. 1803 the land went over to Bavaria. Seven years later, in 1810 Öllingen then went to the Kingdom of Württemberg, which assigned Öllingen to the Oberamt Albeck. The dissolution of the Oberamt Albeck in 1819 the upper office was merged with the Oberamt Ulm. In 1934 the supreme office Ulm became county Ulm and later Ulm district (1938). The town remained a part of the district till the year 1973. The local government reform in 1973 led to the dissolution of the district Ulm and Öllingen came as a separate municipality for Alb Danube county. Until 1786 the horse post of Oberelchingen took their way through Öllingen to Giengen and Nördlingen.
Georg Hiller (* 1946), local politician and honorary citizen of Blaubeuren
