Daisen (大仙市, Daisen-shi) is a city in Akita Prefecture, Japan.
As of May 2015, the city had an estimated population of 83,137 and a population density of 95.9 persons per km2. The total area was 866.77 square kilometres (334.66 sq mi).
Daisen is located in the flatlands of central of Akita Prefecture, bordering on the city of Akita to the west and Iwate Prefecture and the Ou Mountains on the east.
Akita Prefecture
Akita, Akita
Yurihonjō, Akita
Yokote, Akita
Senboku, Akita
Misato, Akita
Iwate Prefecture
Nishiwaga, Iwate
Daisen has a Humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Cfa) with large seasonal temperature differences, with warm to hot (and often humid) summers and cold (sometimes severely cold) winters. Precipitation is significant throughout the year, but is heaviest from August to October.
The area of present-day Daisen was part of ancient Dewa Province. During the Edo period, the area came under the control of the Satake clan, who had been relocated to Kubota Domain from their former holdings in Hitachi Province. After the start of the Meiji period, the area became part of Senboku District, Akita Prefecture in 1878.
The modern city of Daisen was established on March 22, 2005, from the merger of the city of Ōmagari, the towns of Kamioka, Kyōwa, Nakasen, Nishisenboku, Ōta and Semboku, and the village of Nangai (all from Semboku District).
After the merger, Daisen had the distinction of having the largest city assembly in all of Japan, 136 members.
The economy of Daisen is based on agriculture. Numerous sake brewers are located in Daisen.
Daisen has 16 elementary schools, 11 middle schools and six high schools as well as one special education school.
JR East - Akita Shinkansen
Ōmagari
JR East - Ōu Main Line
Ōmagari - Jingūji - Kawarino - Mineyoshikawa - Ugo-Sakai
JR East - Tazawako Line
Uguisuno - Ugo-Nagano - Yariminai - Ugo-Yotsuya - Kita-Ōmagari - Ōmagari
Akita Expressway
National Route 13
National Route 46
National Route 105
National Route 341
 Tettnang, Germany
 Dangjin, Chungcheongnam-do, Korea 
Eiji Gotō, admiral in the Imperial Japanese Navy
Gotō Chūgai, writer
Kazuo Koike, manga writer
Nobuhide Minorikawa, politician
Kazuo Oga
Hitoshi Okuda, Manga artist
Toshirō Yanagiba, actor
Ryōgoku Yūjirō, sumo wrestler
Sukeshiro Terata, politician
