Laudenbach is a community in the Miltenberg district in the Regierungsbezirk of Lower Franconia (Unterfranken) in Bavaria, Germany and a member of the Verwaltungsgemeinschaft (Administrative Community) of Kleinheubach.
Laudenbach lies right on the Bavarian Lower Main between Miltenberg and Obernburg, and borders on the Odenwald.
It is relatively well linked to the highway network by Bundesstraße 469. The Frankfurt Rhine Main Region’s hub can be reached quickly by car or train.
The next community down the Main is Klingenberg am Main, and the next one upstream is Kleinheubach.
The hamlet of Brunnthal in Hessen, which belongs to Michelstadt’s outlying centre of Vielbrunn, is co-administered by Laudenbach.
There has been a slight rise in the community’s population over the last few years owing mainly to the opening of new building areas, such as Sommerberg II, Bocksberg.
The council is made up of 12 council members with seats apportioned thus:
CSU 4 seats
SPD 2 seats
Freie Wähler 6 seats
Currently in office is Bernd Klein.
The community’s arms might be described thus: A bend sinister wavy azure, in chief barry of six Or and gules, in base argent a buffalo’s attire sable.
The wavy bend sinister stands for the community’s namesake brook. The stripes are drawn from the arms once borne by the Counts of Rieneck. They sold their holdings in Laudenbach in 1315 to the Barons of Fechenbach, who then, in 1385, enfeoffed the Counts with the holding. After they died out in 1559, the community passed to Electoral Mainz. The Barons of Fechenbach died out in their male line in 1892. The buffalo’s horn is drawn from their arms. Both these elements symbolize former hegemony.
The arms have been borne since 1970.
Musikverein Harmonie Laudenbach
Sängerlust Laudenbach
The Gospeltrain
Schloss Laudenbach (castle)
Schlosspark Laudenbach
A giant tree in the Schlosspark is the oldest living thing in the Miltenberg district.
Parish and Kindergarten Festival in summer
Football club’s Village Festival in summer
Singing Club’s Johannisfeuer (Midsummer Festival)
Music Club’s May Day celebration
There is a primary school-Hauptschule within the Kleinheubach/Laudenbach/Rüdenau school association.
