Mehsana  pronunciation  (also spelled Mahesana) is a city and municipality in Mehsana district, in the Indian state of Gujarat.
Mehsaji Chavda, a Rajput and an heir of Chawda dynasty, established Mehsana. He constructed the Toran (arc gate) of city and a temple dedicated to Goddess Toran in Vikram Samvat 1414, Bhadrapad Sud 10 (1358 AD). It is described by Jaisinh Brahmbhatt in poems of 1932
Gaekwads conquered Vadodara and established Patan as the administrative headquarters of North Gujarat. Later it was moved to Kadi and subsequently to Mehsana in 1902. They merged it with India after independence in 1947. It was included in Bombay state. Later became part of Gujarat in 1960 after division of Bombay state into Gujarat and Maharashtra. Today Mehsana is a separate district in north Gujarat.
There is a palace built by Gaekwads in city known as Rajmahal.
As of 2011 India census, Mehsana had a population of 184,133. The sex ratio was 894 females/males. Mehsana has an average literacy rate of 84.26%, higher than the national average. Male literacy is 91.88%, and female literacy is 76.12%. In Mehsana, 9.4% of the population is under 6 years of age.
At 762, Mehsana has the lowest child sex ratio among the urban centres in India.
Mehsana has an average elevation of 265 feet (81 m) above sea level.
Hindus are the largest religious community of the city. Other minority religious communities includes Muslims, Christians, Sikhs and Jains.
Simandhar Swami Jain Derasar is located near Modhera cross roads. It is 161 ft (49 m) long, 97 ft (30 m) broad and 107 ft (33 m) high. Moolnayak of the temple is a 145 inches (3.7 m) high white coloured idol of Shri Seemandhar Swami in padmasan mudra is present in the temple.
It includes Hinglaj Mata temple, Swaminarayan temple, Gayatri temple, Ambika Mata temple.
There is a temple dedicated to Ayyappa established by south Indian community and a Gurudwara sahib established by Sikh community near Radhanpur cross road.
Christian churches includes Mar Greegorious Orthodox Syrian Church.
Mehsana has a presence of many major educational institutes. Kendriya Vidyalaya ONGC Mehsana is the best English medium CBSE school in the city, which offers education from class 1 to 12 with science and commerce stream. It is centralized school all over the country. Ganpat University, located 10 km from city, offers specialising in areas as IT, engineering, pharmacy, agriculture, science, management, arts and commerce. Gujarat Power Engineering College and Saffrony Institute of Technology offers courses in engineering and management. B.S Patel College Of Pharmacy offers courses pharmacy. They are affiliated with the Gujarat Technological University. Sarvajanik Kelvani Mandal Trust runs many schools in north Gujarat. It also offers education in field of pharmacy, nursing, homeopathy. There is Gurukul English Medium School in T.J.Highschool Complex 124 years old. This school has been started English medium in year 2012 With a goal to provide Best English Education. There are many primary and higher secondary schools like N.G. International School which is one of CBSE Schools in Mehsana. Bachpan a play school run by. Shikshalay edu. Trust. Sabari Vidya Vihar run by Dharma Sastha Temple is English Medium School, from 2005 100% result in SSC. The another one of the school is Bethany Mission School, run by shree c. v. shah educational & cheritable trust. , since last 25 years. the school is running English and Gujarati medium-both from nusery to std12(science stream.)
Major multi-speciality hospitals include General Civil Government Hospital, Lions Hospital, Global Multi Speciality Hospital, G.K. Orthopaedic Hospital, Mehsana District Bank General Hospital.
There are many small clinics available on Dairy Road, and Jail Road area. You can also find blood bank on Dairy Road area.
Wide-Angle Multiplex, Cine Pulse, Prashant Cinema, B.K. Cinema provides entertainment facilities. Shanku's Water Park and Tirupati nature park are located nearby.
Mehsana have presence of dairy, agriculture and road equipment based industry. It also have oil and natural gas production fields and the small and medium size industries. Banking and finance sector have nationalised, cooperative, and private sector banks. There are many big and small road equipment industries are established in Mehsana -Dediyasan GIDC. Mehsana city is the one of the big manufacturer for the road equipment.
The city is known for its local Mehsani breed of buffalos. The Mehsana District Cooperative Milk Producers’ Union Ltd., popularly known as Dudhsagar Dairy, is a member of the state-level - Gujarat Cooperative Milk Marketing Federation Ltd., Anand. Dudhsagar Dairy is the largest dairy in Asia, processing on an average 1.41 million kilograms of milk each day. It has established a network for procuring milk from 4,500,000 milk producers through 1150 village milk cooperatives.
Established in November 1967, the Mehsana fields are one of the highest onshore-producing asset of the ONGC. Covering an area of 6000 km2 with 28 fields in 2007–2008. Mehsana also has 1311 oil wells and 16 gas wells producing 5800 tonnes per day.
City bus service is run by municipality connecting nearby villages. Autorickshows are available.
It is approximately 75 km away from Ahmedabad. It is connected to Ahmedabad, Gandhinagar, Patan, Unjha and Palanpur via state highways. GSRTC, a state run transport service, provides bus service connecting all major towns of Gujarat.
It is also connected by rail to other major cities in India. There are daily trains to and from Delhi and Mumbai, and direct weekly or bi-weekly trains connecting major cities in north and south India including Bangalore. Mahesana railway station, on the Jaipur-Ahmedabad line, has a computerised reservation facility.
The nearest airport is Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International Airport at Ahmedabad. Prepaid taxis are available to Mehsana from the airport.
Currently Mehsana Airport is used for non scheduled operation and as a civil aviation training centre, run by Ahmedabad Aviation and Aeronautics Ltd. It has an area covering 64 acres (260,000 m2).
Mehsana district
