Parari, also called Heetan Parari or Hetan Parari, is an ancient farming village located in Bihar, India, between the modern cities of Patna and Varanasi.
The village can be reached by travelling east by train from New Delhi to Buxar railway station; from Buxar, Parari is seven miles north east towards the Ganges River.
There is a school in Parari called the Baal Vikas Kendra (Centre for Child Development) that serves the local educational needs for both girls and boys. This school was first funded and founded by Dr. Suresh Chandra Tiwari and was implemented locally by Mr. Bindeshwari Tripathi and his family. The school began as a simple hut and has flourished into a cement building over the past two decades. Funding has been mainly from the US. This school emphasizes education as a means to improve the general human condition.
This Rajnikant Foundation, in Parari, has established a tree planting programme that was started in the 1980s as a means to encourage the local population to plant more trees and to abstain from cutting down older trees. This program was spearheaded by Dr. Suresh Chandra Tiwari (1927–2010).
The Rajnikant Foundation is a non-profit NGO named after Mr. Rajnikant Tiwari (1901-2004) who was born in British India. Mr. Rajnikant was a freedom fighter, an activist, and a teacher. He lived a very simple life in service of others. The Foundation was established by Mr. Satish Chandra Tripathi with the help of his uncle, Dr. Suresh Chandra Tiwari (1927-2010) who was the only child of Mr. Rajnikant Tiwari. Presently, the Rajnikant Foundation supports the Baal Vikas Kendra and the tree planting project. 2014 to 2015 was a major period of construction for the Rajnikant Foundation. The first scaled down near-replica of the Parthenon was constructed on the Balvikas school campus. This construction was dedicated to the spirit of the ancestors. The Parthenon is used for student assembly, assembly hall for the village elders, and for general purpose assembly for the entire region. Most of the structure is cement but there has been generous use of Makrana Marble on the outer surface. The Parthenon is simple yet elegant and represents purity of young children who come to this place to learn. Funds from the Rajnikant Foundation were also used to complete the main building of the Balvikas Kendra in Parari, renovate the Devi Asharphi school in the village of Deokuli, and renovate a Dharmshala near the village of Deokuli. All the projects are funded through the not-for profit NGO Rajnikant Foundation. http://indianngos.org/ngo_detail.aspx?nprof=225512232