Jalandhar (Punjabi Gurmukhi: ਜਲੰਧਰ), formerly Jullundur, is a city in the northwestern India state of Punjab.
The oldest city in Punjab and one of the oldest in the country, Jalandhar has seen rapid urbanisation and developed into a highly industrialised centre of commercial activity in recent years. Jalandhar was the capital of Punjab from India's independence (1947) until Chandigarh was built in 1953. On the Grand Trunk Road, it is a major rail and road junction and is 144 km northwest of the state capital, Chandigarh. The city was known as Jullundur in British India.
The history of Jalandhar District comprises three periods — ancient, medieval and modern.
In ancient time, the district comprised the whole of the Upper Doabas from Ravi River to Sutlej River. The city is named after Jalandhar, a demon king, who is mentioned in the Puranas and Mahabharta. According to another legend, Jalandhar was the capital of the kingdom of Lava (Ramayana), son of Rama. According to another version Jalandhar is said to have derived its name from the vernacular term `Jalandhar' means area inside the water, i.e., tract lying between the two rivers Satluj and Beas. Another name was Trigartta which was ruled by the Katoch Dynasty, as it was waters by three rivers, Satluj, Beas and Ravi. The whole of Punjab and the area of present Jalandhar District was part of the Indus Valley Civilization. Harappa and Mohenjo-daro are the sites where remains of the Indus Valley Civilization have been found extensively. The archaeological explorations made during recent years have pushed the ancient times of Jalandhar District of Harappa period.
The modern history of Jalandhar District states that Khilafat Movement was started in the district in early 1920 to bring pressure upon British rulers to change their policy towards Turkey. Mahatma Gandhi extended sympathy and support to this movement. Jalandhar District was declared 'Proclaimed Area' under the Seditious Meetings Act. After the independence of the country, however, the district was affected by communal riots and exodus of minority communities from both sides of the border, consequent upon the partition of the country.
The city has a humid subtropical climate with cool winters and hot summers. Summers last from April to June and winters from November to February. Temperatures in the summer vary from average highs of around 48 °C (118 °F) to average lows of around 25 °C (77 °F). Winter temperatures have highs of 19 °C (66 °F) to lows of −7 °C (19 °F). The climate is dry on the whole, except during the brief southwest monsoon season during July and August. The average annual rainfall is about 70 cm.
As per provisional data of 2011 census Jalandhar had a population of 873,725, of which 463,975 were male and 409,750 female. The literacy rate was 85.46 per cent.
Upmarket localities include Civil lines, Dilbagh Nagar Extension, Mota Singh Nagar, Green Park, Green Model Town, Model Town, Jawahar Nagar, Gupta Colony, Guru Teg Bahadur Nagar, Urban Estate Phase I & II, New Jawahar Nagar, Defence Colony, Adarsh nagar, Adampur Doaba, J.P. Nagar, Grover Colony, Central Town etc.
Jalandhar provides goods like glass and furniture to neighbouring cities and is a hub of sports goods manufacture for international market.
The nearest airport is Pathankot Airport at Pathankot, about 90 km and Sri Guru Ram Dass Jee International Airport at Amritsar, about 75 km (47 mi) northwest of Jalandhar. It is connected to other parts of the country by regular flights. Several airlines operate flights from abroad, including Birmingham, Dubai and Doha. The airport handles as many as 48 flights every week up from the occasional, intermittent ones some years ago.
Jalandhar City railway station is well connected to other parts of the country. Jalandhar city is a major station of the Amritsar-Delhi rail link. It is very well connected to capital Delhi by daily trains like Shatabdi Express, Intercity Express and other mail/superfast express. Direct train service is available for other major cities like Mumbai, Calcutta, Chennai, Patna, Guwahati, Pune, Haridwar, Varanasi, Jaipur and Jammu Tawi. Some prestigious trains that halt in Jalandhar City railway station are Howrah Mail, Golden Temple Mail (Frontier Mail), New-Delhi Amritsar Shatabdi Express, Paschim Express. Now many trains of Jammu route are extend up to Mata Vaishno Devi-Katra.
There is a large network of bus services of Punjab, Himachal, Delhi, Haryana, Pepsu, Chandigarh, U.P., Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan State Roadways, apart from private operators. Jalandhar has many good road services.
Shopping malls in Jalandhar include:
Viva Collage Mall
MBD Neopollis
The Galleria
Curo High Street
Sarb Multiplex
Splendor Shagun
PPR Mall
Naaz Shopping Center
The Metropolitan
City Square
Vasal Tower
LPU Shoping Mall
Lovely Mart
Lovely Bakers
One Stop Shope
Jyoti Mall
Chunmun Mall
The Parikrama
The City Square
The Kla Niketan
Taneja & Co Property Linkers
Gurduwara Thra Sahib (Hazara Village)
Gurudwara Singh Sabha (Jalandhar Cantt)
Mayaan da Gurudwara (Jalandhar Cantt)
Gurudwara Kakipind Rama mandi
Devi Talab Mandir
Imam Nasir Mausoleum and Jamma Masjid
Shiv Mandir
Shiv Bari Mandir
Tulsi Mandir
Gurdwara Chhevin Pathshahi
Gurudwara Singh Sabha-Model Town
Gurudwara Talhan Sahib
St Mary's Cathedral Church (Jalandhar Cantt)
Gurudwara Nauwi Patshahi
Church of North India (CNI) Mission Compound
Gurdwara Panj Tirth Sahib (Jandu Singha)
Gurudwara Baba Shaheed Nihal Singh Ji Talhan
Sankat Mochan Hanuman Mandir (phillar tehsil)
Singh Sabha Gurudwara Sahib (chuharwali)
shri Guru Ravidass Gurudwara (chuharwali)
Pushpa Gujral Science City
Fun City
Shaheed-E-Azam Sardar Bhagat Museum Khatkar Kalan
Company Bagh
Niku Park, Model Town
Wonder Land
Adarsh Nagar Park
PVR, BMC chowk
Doordarshan Kendra, Jalandhar is an Indian television station in Jalandhar, owned and operated by state-owned Doordarshan, the television network of Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India). It was established in 1979 and produces and broadcasts the 24-hour Punjabi language TV channel, DD Punjabi, which was launched in 1998 and covers most of the state of Punjab, India.
The city is the region's headquarters for newspapers, national television and radio stations. These include Daily Ajit, Jagbani, Punjab Kesari, Dainik Jagran, Hindustan Times, The Tribune, Dainik Bhaskar, Hind Samachar, etc.
State-owned All India Radio has a local station in Jalandhar that transmits programs of mass interest. FM local radio stations include:
Radio Mantra 91.9 MHz
BIG FM 92.7 92.7 MHz
94.3 FM-My Fm- 94.3 MHz
Radio Mirchi 98.3 MHz
All India Radio 102.7 MHz
According to the Municipal Corporation of Jalandhar, there are over 420 hospitals in Jalandhar. The city claims to have highest number of hospitals in Asia.
Among them are
PIMS Hospital
Guru Nanak Mission Hospital
Meena Gupta hospital
Patel Hospital
Jammu Hospital
Joshi Hospital
Bhutani Hospital
Sharanjeet Hospital
Ghai Hospital
Civil Hospital
Tagore Hospital
Tyagmurti Hospital
Sigma Hospital
Sikka Hospital
Karan Hospital
Johal hospital
Cricket is very popular in grounds and streets of the city. There is an international-standard stadium at Burlton Park. The Indian cricket team played a Test Match against the Pakistan cricket team on this ground on 24 September 1983.
Major Kabaddi matches are usually held at Guru Gobind Singh Stadium.
Guru Gobind Singh Stadium is a multi-purpose stadium in Jalandhar. It is usually used mostly for football matches and is the home stadium of JCT Mills Football Club. People can be seen jogging, playing soccer, weight-lifting, etc. in the stadium most of the time. The Punjab government has started new projects at the stadium.
Surjeet Hockey Stadium is a field hockey stadium in Jalandhar, Punjab, India. It is named after Jalandhar-born Olympian Surjit Singh. This stadium is home of the franchise Sher-e-Punjab of the World Series Hockey.
There is a Government Sports College in the city and it is a focus for many of the National Sports Councils. In this college, many sports are played like cricket, hockey, swimming, volleyball, basketball, etc.
Higher education institutions include:
DAV Institute of Engineering & Technology
CT Group of Institute, Jalandhar
DAV College, Jalandhar
Punjab Technical University
Doaba Collage
St. Soldier Management & Technical Institute
Sant Baba Bhag Singh University
PCMSD college for women
Apeejay Institute of Management Technical Campus, Jalandhar (Punjab)
Trinity Collage
Mehr Chand Polytechnic College
B.D Arya Girls collage
Lyallpur Khalsa College
Lyallpur Khalsa College for Women
KCL Group of Institute
Mata Gujri Institute of Nursing
Punjab Institute of Medical Sciences
Delhi Public School
National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar
DAV University
Lovely Professional University
Sant Baba Bhag Singh University
Khalsa College
