Baoshan  (Chinese: 保山; pinyin: Bǎoshān, historically also Yongchang) is a prefecture-level city in western Yunnan province, People's Republic of China. Baoshan is the third biggest metropolitan area in Yunnan after Kunming and Qujing.
The prefecture has about 2.5 million inhabitants.
The city-prefecture of Baoshan has jurisdiction over five subdivisions - a district, one county-level city and three counties:
It is located between the border of Myanmar and the Lancang river (Mekong). The Nujiang (Salween River) flows through the entire length of the prefecture, north to south.
Tempered by the low latitude and moderate elevation, Baoshan has a mild subtropical highland climate (Köppen Cwb), with short, mild, dry winters, and warm, rainy summers. Frost may occur in winter but the days still generally warm up to around 16 to 17 °C (61 to 63 °F), with a January average of 8.5 °C (47.3 °F). The warmest month is June, which averages 21.2 °C (70.2 °F). Nearly three-fourths of the annual rainfall occurs from June to October.
According to the Baoshan Ethnic Gazetteer (2006:337), ethnic Bulang are distributed in the following villages within Baoshan City.
Shidian County
Mulaoyuan 木老元乡: Mulaoyuan 木老元, Hazhai 哈寨, Dadi 大地, Longtang 龙塘
Bailang Township 摆榔乡: Jici 鸡茨, Dazhong 大中, Jianshan 尖山
Yaoguan Township 姚关乡: Duopo 陡坡
Jiufang Township 酒房乡: Yakou 哑口
Changning County
Gengga Township 更嘎乡: Baicaolin 百草林, Dachushui 大出水
Kasi Township 卡斯镇
Xingu Village 新谷村: Guban 谷板, Zhongzhai 中寨
Kasi Village 卡斯村: Shuanglong 双龙, Yingbaizhai 应百寨, Ergoudi 二沟地
The Yaojing 尧净, a subgroup of the De'ang, are located in Baizhai 白寨, Laxian 拉线, and Dagoubian 大沟边 of Mangyan Village 芒颜村 and Shiti Village 石梯村 in Lujiang Township 潞江乡, Longyang District 隆阳区 (Baoshan Ethnic Gazetteer 2006:490-491).
Baoshan lies on the main road from Ruili on the Burmese border to Kunming. The Baoshan−Kunming section is completed highway, but the Ruili−Baoshan section remains incomplete.
Baoshan Airport (IATA Code: BSD) has daily flights to and from Kunming.
A railway line connecting the city via Dali to Kunming and the rest of China is under construction (2012).
Three Parallel Rivers of Yunnan Protected Areas - Unesco World Heritage Site
Gaoligong Mountain
