Soveria Simeri is a comune and town in the province of Catanzaro in the Calabria region of Italy.
Soveria Simeri is a town of 1,626 inhabitants in the province of Catanzaro.
The village is 16 kilometres (10 mi) from Catanzaro, 12 kilometres (7 mi) from the Ionian coast and 20 kilometres (12 mi) from the Sila. Due to its central location is chosen as a destination for many tourists, including foreigners. The economy is predominantly agricultural with a good development of the primary sector. Well-known are the productions of citrus fruits, olive oil, honey, meats, dairy products, and organic products. The craftsmanship is the pride of the country, with its three laboratories blown glass, in which we produce the products exported abroad, and two wrought iron. The village offers many leisure activities for your leisure time with feasts, festivals and theatrical and cultural events and the possibility of sports facilities at present.
Some believe that the original name of Soveria Simeri was to Trischene because it included three zones: Simeri Soveria and Crichi. Following a strong earthquake sank some parts and the whole area was divided into three sections, on which are located the countries present. It should have a very remote origin that dates back to the Magna Grecia.
Later, in the Middle Ages, enjoyed some importance, and, as the story goes, Simeri, the original nucleus, was the seat of a duchy. It is found in fact ancient archaeological finds such as the castle, the ruins of which still remain today and the cathedral almost completely ruined; in the surrounding countryside were also found coins and amphorae of the Greek period.
According to some accounts, reported by some of the elders, a gallery Soveria joined with the original section of Simeri. News taken from two Chronicles, reported that three sisters of Priam ( Etilla, Astioche and Medesicaste ), survived the ruins of Troy, landed to Uriah, near Sellia Marina and they built three tents ( Treis SCHENE ). Distant origins, but certainly Greek, proven by the discovery of skeletons and objects placed beside them, on the obverse of coins with two or three tabernacles on the reverse and the Minotaur. Here begins the story of Trischene, large and thriving town located between the current Crotone and Squillace.
It was first under the rule of the city of Pythagoras while later, after the great Roman expansion, to escape the threat of Bruzi and the Carthaginians, was placed under the protectorate of Rome, until it becomes a colony, but never rise to the rank of " municipium ".
At the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Arab invasions and sarecene that in the whole southern Calabria, urged the people to take refuge in the hinterland, in camps and small villages perched in the mountains, also affected Trischene which was destroyed in the tenth century. After this, part of the population was forced to take refuge on the mountain Panormite ( Old Tavern ) and the other party chose Mount Selion ( Sellia Superior ), but nothing prevents us from thinking that even a small core of people chose the current territory Soveria giving rise to Casal Suveria .
From the sixteenth century to the present
In 1541 the territory of Soveria Simeri was owned by the Duke Ignatius finger belonging to the Duchy of Simeri. At his death, his possessions were abandoned for a few years ( since he had no heirs ), until they became a possession of the farmers and peasants who had been in the service of the Duke. It seems that the village was founded in the late sixteenth century by some members of the families and the Great Gareri. The first part of the name, Soveria has fitonimica origin and may arise from rowan or Calabrian suveru, " cork ". The second, however, was almost certainly originated from the river which flows Simeri the area. He was initially the name of Casal Soveria because of a dense forest of cork trees which occupied the territory.
Subsequently, the center was joined to the land of Simeri. How Simeri house, belonged to Borgia until 1622. Nuclei The first habitable arose in the place of a church dedicated to St. Nicholas that currently is found at the beginning of the country. After the Borgias, the land passed to Ravaschieri principles of Satriano. Francis, lord of the house, gave it to his wife Agatha Pallavicini and ordered that from that time the country took this name ( it was called, in fact, Pallavicini until 1806 ). In 1664, by decision of its Parliament, Pallavicini was aggregated to the land of Simeri with the privilege of exemption from certain countries and the payment of two hundred ducats. The house was then Simeri of De Fiore, of Barreta and Gonzaga de Nobili who remained there until 1806, the year of subversion of feudalism. Under the government of Belcastro, with the title of university, it was also referred to by the name of Soveria of Catanzaro.
In 1811, following the administrative reorganization, was put in charge of the district includes the municipalities of Simeri, Sellia and Zagarise. In 1956 part of its territory, including its outlet to the sea, was assigned to the setting up of common Sellia Marina.
