The Dubai Mall (Arabic: دبي مول‎‎) is a shopping mall in Dubai and the largest mall in the world by total area. Along with West Edmonton Mall in Canada, it's the eighteenth largest shopping mall in the world by gross leasable area. Located in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, it is part of the 20-billion-dollar Downtown complex, and includes 1,200 shops. In 2011 it was the most visited building on the planet, attracting over 34 million visitors. Access to the mall is provided via Doha Street, rebuilt as a double-decker road in April 2009.
Twice delayed, Dubai Mall opened on 8 May 2009, with about 635 retailers, marking the world's second largest-ever mall opening in retail history behind West Edmonton Mall. However it is not the largest in gross leasable space, and is surpassed in that category by several malls including the New South China Mall, which is the world's largest, albeit largely derelict, Golden Resources Mall, SM City North Edsa, and SM Mall of Asia.
The Dubai Mall recorded 61,000 tickets sold for the Dubai Aquarium and Discovery Centre in the first five days, following its opening. The Dubai Mall hosted over 37 million visitors in 2009, and attracts more than 750,000 visitors every week., In 2010 it hosted 47 million, and saw footfall increase by around 27 percent over 2009, despite the economic crisis. In 2012, Dubai Mall continued to hold title of world's most-visited shopping and leisure destination, and attracted more than 65 million visitors, an increase of more than 20 percent compared to the 54 million recorded in 2011. It attracted more visitors than New York City with over 52 million tourists in 2012, and Los Angeles with 41 million. The numbers also surpass visitor arrivals to all landmark leisure destinations and theme parks in the world including Times Square (39.2 million), Central Park (38 million), and Niagara Falls (22.5 million).
Over 13 million square foot (equivalent in size to more than 50 football fields), the Dubai Mall has a total internal floor area of 5.9 million square feet (55 ha) and leasable space of 3.77 million square feet (35 ha), about the same as the West Edmonton Mall.
It also has a 250-room luxury hotel, 22 cinema screens plus 120 restaurants and cafes. The Mall has over 14,000 parking spaces across 3 car parks, with valet services and a car locator ticketing system. The mall has won five awards – two awards at the Retail Future Project Awards at Mapic, Cannes, in 2004, for Best Retail Development Scheme (Large) and Best Use of Lighting in a Retail Environment and the Dubai Mall brochure collected three awards at the Summit Creative Awards 2005 in Portland, Oregon – the Gold award for Best Art Direction / Graphic Design, Silver award for Best 4-colour B2B Brochure, and a Judges Special Recognition award.
Dubai Aquarium & Underwater Zoo, designed by Peddle Thorp, managed by Emaar Entertainment, brings the marvel of the ocean floor to life. The aquarium, located in The Dubai Mall, showcases one of the world’s most diverse collections of marine animals with more than 300 species including sharks and rays.
Its 270-degree acrylic walkthrough tunnel makes for an incredible close-encounter experience with some of the most fascinating underwater animals on the planet. A special 'lunar-cyclic' lighting system changes the ambience of the tank depending on the time of day.
The Underwater Zoo is located above the aquarium, and provides an interactive approach to educating children and visitors on the ecology and sustainability of marine life. The journey consists of three ecological zones: Rainforest, Rocky Shore, and Living Ocean, each of which features a variety of aquatic animals including penguins, crocodiles, piranhas, giant spider crabs, water rats, sea horses, and jellyfish amongst others.
The world-renowned attraction was awarded with the prestigious ‘Certificate of Excellence’ by TripAdvisor in 2012 and won the ‘Images Most Admired Retailer of the Year – Leisure & Entertainment’ at Images RetailME Awards 2012.
The Mall adopted an International Standard of Ethics and Animal Welfare Policy in its development and operation.
Official website: http://thedubaiaquarium.com
The Mall's Dubai Ice Rink multi-purpose venue, uses refrigeration plant technology by developing 1.5 inches (38 mm) of ice bed, 2 times the thickness of an NHL ice rink for Olympic-sized attraction. Dubai Ice Rink can host a capacity of up to 2,000 guests, when converted into a multi-functional hall with a multimedia system including a 20 m × 10 m LED screen.
Managed by Emaar Entertainment, the rink is the place-to-go for ice skating in Dubai, and host a variety of international, competition-standard events.
With a seating capacity of 350, Dubai Ice Rink is a family-oriented attraction open to the general public. The rink also serves as a multi-purpose venue that can be transformed into a concert arena, or host private functions.
Dubai Ice Rink is a must-visit leisure attraction and sports venue in The Dubai Mall, particularly popular among teens, offering several unmatched features for the youth. Dubai Ice Rink Skating Academy (DIRSA) is a member of the International Skating Institute and offers individual membership to its students, which allows for official testing, documentation and legal participation in competitions and shows.
The Dubai Ice Rink provides professional ice skating lessons and caters to most ages through its Learn-to-Skate programme, Dubai Ice Rink skating academy for figure skating and ice hockey, as well as hosting Disco and Mega Skate sessions.
Official Website: http://dubaiicerink.com/en/
SEGA Republic, a 76,000 sq ft (7,100 m2) indoor theme park, was opened on 21 August 2009 where visitors can enjoy over 150 amusement games; It is a park that is mainly dedicated to SEGA's video game icon Sonic the Hedgehog.
Emaar Entertainment's SEGA Republic in The Dubai Mall brings thrilling, unforgettable leisure experiences in a safe environment.
The 76,000 sq ft indoor park features 15 rides and an array of amusement games, including cutting-edge motion simulators, classic carnival games, competitive tests of skill, and one of the region’s widest arrays of redemption games.
Emaar Entertainment is continuously expanding the choices offered at SEGA Republic with brand-new rides. Recent additions to Sega Republic rides include Xyclone, Robotnik and Rope Rush, which features two levels of gripping adventure where you will have to balance, climb and find your way through obstacles.
‘Lazeraze’ is an innovative laser maze while ‘Racer’ Bumper Cars offers a speed-infused rush for thrill-seekers.
Adding to the family indoor theme park experience, little ones can have fun at the ‘soft play area’, which features customised activities to keep them entertained for hours.
Official website: http://segarepublic.com
KidZania® is an award-winning children’s ‘edutainment’ concept, in The Dubai Mall, introduced to the Middle East through an exclusive partnership with Emaar Entertainment LLC.
An 80,000 sq ft interactive mini-city, KidZania® combines play with learning through an innovative approach. KidZania® allows kids to do what comes naturally to them: role-playing by mimicking activities traditionally done by adults in real life.
As in the real world, children perform “jobs” and are either paid for their work or pay to shop or be entertained.
The indoor edutainment centre is built to scale for children, and accurately reflects the workings of a typical city.
KidZania® is manned by a team of professionals. The high ratio of trained staff-to-children ensures the safest and finest edutainment experience.
For security purposes, a Remote Frequency wristband policy is followed that keeps track of children’s activities and whereabouts, reassuring parents on the safety of their children.
KidZania® has brought a clear differential to the educational environment of the UAE by winning the approval of the UAE Ministry of Education for field trips as part of the academic curriculum.
Official website: www.kidzania.ae
Reel Cinemas, managed by Emaar Entertainment, sets a new standard for cinema experiences in the region. With ergonomically designed seats offering maximum legroom for complete comfort, advanced projection and AV system as standard, there is no other place to enjoy the latest movie.
The 22-screen Reel Cinemas at The Dubai Mall is the largest of its kind in the region. The megaplex features four Platinum Movie Suites, offering the ultimate in cinema luxury and 17 commercial halls, including the first THX-certified cinema in Dubai.
Official website: http://reelcinemas.ae/en/
The Dubai Mall is home to one of the newest Rainforest Cafe locations. Having opened in 2009, it faces the aquarium and is made to emulate tropical ruins with moving ruins and light shows, which are only found at this location.
The Dubai Mall contains more than 1,200 shops.
In October 2009 it was reported that the world's largest candy store had opened in Dubai Mall.
The mall was built by a joint venture of Dutco Balfour Beatty, Al Ghandi/CCC and Turner Construction for Emaar Properties and was scheduled to be completed in 2006, claiming to be the size of 50 "international-sized football (soccer) pitches". Most of the workers used in construction of the mall were Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi and Sri Lankan guest workers.
In December 2012, Emaar Properties have announced the completion of the Metro Link which is a 820 m long elevated, air-conditioned footbridge that connects Burj Khalifa/The Dubai Mall Metro Station to the Dubai Mall.
In June 2013, the Dubai Mall commenced its phase one of its expansion plan by increasing the total retail floor area by 1 million sq. ft. so as to accommodate more visitors. The project is set for completion for the beginning of 2017 
Largest mall in the world with total area 1,124,000 m².
Worlds fifteenth largest mall with Gross Leasable Area (GLA) 350,000 m².
World’s largest acrylic panel (Aquarium) inside Dubai Mall, which is (32.88 m wide × 8.3 m high × 750 mm thick and weighing 245 tons).
The world’s largest sweet shop, "Candylicious", spanning over 10,000 sq ft (930 m2) inside Dubai Mall.
Dubai Mall records more than 5 million visitors in the month of March 2010 during the one-month Dubai Shopping Festival, setting an all-time record in visitor footfall
Dubai Mall was named the best shopping experience on 29 April 2010 by Grazia Style Awards.
The Dubai Mall hosted a record 37 million visitors in its first year of operation in 2009, and attracts more than 750,000 visitors every week.
The Dubai Mall hosted a record 47 million visitors in 2010, and broke the record of 37 million visitors received last year, an increase of 27 percent despite the economic crisis.
In 2011, Dubai Mall becomes the world's most-visited shopping and leisure destination, and attracted more than 56 million visitors, an increase of 15 percent from the visitors of last year.
In 2012, Dubai Mall continued to hold title of world's most-visited shopping and leisure destination, and attracted more than 65 million visitors, an increase of more than 20 percent compared to the 54 million recorded in 2011.
On 25 February 2010 the aquarium sprung a leak which led many shops to temporarily close down and forced shoppers to evacuate the mall immediately. It reopened the following day.
In March 2015, more than a hundred foreign labourers protested in front of Dubai Mall due to overtime wages not being paid, causing disruption to traffic in the area. The situation came under control within an hour by the police.
On 31 December 2015 the mall was evacuated because of a major fire at the nearby The Address Hotel.
The Dubai Mall was featured in the documentary show called Megastructures that aired on the National Geographic Channel.
Dubai Fountain
List of shopping malls in Dubai
List of the world's largest shopping malls
Mall of Arabia (Dubai)
Mall of the Emirates
