Quesnel /kwəˈnɛl/ is a small city that is part of the Cariboo District of British Columbia, Canada. Located nearly evenly between the cities of Prince George and Williams Lake, it is on the main route to northern British Columbia and Yukon. It is claimed to be home to the world's largest gold pan, although this is disputed by Nome, Alaska. The Rocky Mountaineer train also travels through and stops overnight in Quesnel.
Quesnel is sister city to Shiraoi, Japan and Val-d'Or, Quebec. Quesnel hosted the 2000 British Columbia Winter Games, an annual provincial amateur sports competition. To the east of Quesnel lie Wells, Barkerville, and Bowron Lake Provincial Park, a popular canoeing destination in the Cariboo Mountains.
The name is derived from Jules Maurice Quesnel, who accompanied Simon Fraser on his journey to the Pacific Ocean. Quesnel came to be called 'Quesnellemouth' to distinguish it from 'Quesnel Forks', 97 kilometres (60 mi) up river. In 1870 it had been shortened to Quesnelle and by 1900 it was spelled the way it is now. Quesnel is located along the gold mining trail known as the Cariboo Wagon Road and was the commercial centre of the Cariboo Gold Rush. It also marks one end of the Alexander MacKenzie Heritage Trail. Because of its location on the Fraser River it was also an important landing for sternwheelers during 1862 until 1886 and then from 1909 until 1921. The last sternwheeler on the upper Fraser was Quesnel's own namesake craft, and home town product, the Quesnel. Quesnel was incorporated in 1928.
Location: 52°59′N 122°29′W
Elevation: 474 m (1,555.1 ft)
Average Annual Snowfall: 177.9 cm (70.0 in)
Average Annual Rainfall: 540.3 mm (21.3 in)
Frost Free Days: 179
Average Winter Temperature: −8.6 °C (16.5 °F)
Extreme Minimum Temperature: −46.7 °C (−52.1 °F)
Average Summer Temperature: 16.7 °C (62.1 °F)
Extreme Maximum Temperature: 36.7 °C (98.1 °F)
Time Zone: Pacific Standard Time
Considering it being located inland and around the 53rd parallel north Quesnel's humid continental climate is very mild by Canadian standards, being subject to marine airflows from the Pacific. Overnight lows are still cool even in summer, but daytime temperatures average above 24 °C (75 °F) in that season according to Environment Canada.
Quesnel had a population of 9,326 people in 2006, which was a decrease of 7.1% from the 2001 census count. The median household income in 2005 for Quesnel was $54,044, which is slightly above the British Columbia provincial average of $52,709.[2]
As of 2012, the population of Quesnel is estimated to still be about 10,000 people living within the city, with roughly 13,000 people living outside the city limits.
Quesnel's municipal government consists of a 7-member Mayor and Council. The current Council consists of Mayor Bob Simpson and Councillors Ed Coleman, Scott Elliott, Mike Cave, Laurey-Anne Roodenburg, Shushil Thapar and John Brisco.
Quesnel is part of School District 28. It contains several elementary schools, as well as a Junior and a Senior Secondary School (Quesnel Junior High School and Correlieu Senior Secondary school respectively). Also within the school district is McNaughton Centre which is an Alternate High school. For post secondary education, Quesnel contains the College of New Caledonia and University of Northern British Columbia, which offer several programs but is most noted for its Nursing program.
Quesnel is served by the Quesnel Airport, with several commercial flights daily to & from Vancouver, BC. The city is a regular stop on Greyhound Canada's schedules between Kamloops and Prince George and also has a local transit system provided by BC Transit.
Quesnel was formerly home to the BCHL's Quesnel Millionaires junior A hockey team. The team moved to Chilliwack for the 2011/2012 season.
Quesnel also has minor baseball, softball, lacrosse, ringette, roller derby, and football leagues. A Mountain biking skills park is located behind the Rec Center.
Rory MacDonald - Mixed martial artist currently signed with the Ultimate Fighting Championship in the Welterweight division.
Bob Gassoff - former National Hockey League player (St. Louis Blues).
Brad Gassoff - former National Hockey League player (Vancouver Canucks).
Rod Dallman - former National Hockey League player (New York Islanders & Philadelphia Flyers).
Errol Rausse - former National Hockey League player (Washington Capitals).
Aaron Gagnon - former National Hockey League Player (Dallas Stars & Winnipeg Jets).
Brett Festerling - former National Hockey League Player (Anaheim Ducks & Winnipeg Jets).
Quesnel View
West Quesnel
Red Bluff
Kersley
Rich Bar
Dragon Lake
Cottonwood
Nazko
Bouchie Lake
Quesnel has "sister city" agreements with the following cities:
 Val-d'Or, Quebec, Canada
 Shiraoi, Japan
