Sandanski (Bulgarian: Сандански, formerly known as Sveti Vrach, Bulgarian: Свети Врач, until 1949) is a town and a recreation centre in south-western Bulgaria, part of Blagoevgrad Province. Named after revolutionary Yane Sandanski, it is situated in a valley at the foot of Pirin Mountains, along the banks of Sandanska Bistritsa River. Sandanski is about 20 km away from Bulgaria-Greece border and 100 km away from Aegean sea.
The town has a convenient location, mild to warm climate (with the highest average annual temperature in the country, +15.3°C) and relatively high concentration of thermal water springs, which all make it a very popular destination for relaxation and recreation.
Sandanski is located in the Sandanski-Petrich Valley, surrounded by the Pirin, Belasitsa, Ogragden and other smaller range of mountains. The town is about 160 km south from Bulgaria's capital Sofia along the major European Route E79. Following the same route at almost the same distance is Thessaloniki, Greece's second largest city.
Sandanski has developed in an amphitheatrical fashion on the outer south-west flanks of Pirin Mountains along the lower reaches of Sandanska Bistritsa River. Town's altitude is 240–300 meters. Its geographical location between Kresna and Rupel Gorges helps for town's mild winter temperatures. Statistically Sandanski has the warmest temperatures in Bulgaria with a total of around 2700 annual sunshine hours.
Within a short drive from Sandanski is Melnik, the smallest town in Bulgaria in terms of population, but attractive tourist destination for its authentic architecture and wine production. In a close proximity are the village of Rozhen and Rozhen Monastery.
Sandanski is on the northern border of the continental mediterranean climate. Summers are very hot and dry with occasional thunderstorms and during heat waves the temperature may exceed 40 °C reaching to 45 °C, the highest recorded temperature in the city. Winters are damp and relatively mild, but there is great variation between the years and heavy snow and temperatures below −15 °C can sometimes happen. The lowest recorded temperatures is -21 °C. Winters last for about three months from December through February, springs and falls are generally about two months each. The summer is longest season in Sandanski, starting from mid-May and lasting until mid-October, sometimes even until November. July through September is the driest period while October through December – the wettest.
Climate table:
Climate table:
Sandanski is the seat of Sandanski municipality (part of Blagoevgrad Province), which includes the following 54 places:
Sandanski Point on Livingston Island in the South Shetland Islands, Antarctica is named after the town of Sandanski.
