Medveđa (Serbian Cyrillic: Медвеђа, pronounced [ˈmɛdvɛdʑa], Albanian: Medvegja) is a town and municipality in Jablanica District of Serbia. According to the 2011 census, the municipality of Medveđa has a population of 7,438 people, while the town has a population of 3,236.
The name is derived from the Serbian word medved (медвед), "bear", hence meaning "the place of the bears".
During the Roman period, there was a town (mansia) with the name Idimum located in the cadastral area of the modern town. Architectural debris dating to the 4th century AD lay at various locations of the town, as it was a transitory zone of Upper Moesia; travel and postal stations are among the finds.
Yugoslav Partisans killed approximately 200 people in Medveđa after taking the town in 1944.
The Liberation Army of Preševo, Medveđa and Bujanovac, an Albanian insurgent group, was active in the region following the Kosovo War, with the goal to secede these three municipalities from Yugoslavia and join them to Kosovo. The insurgency was crushed in 2001. 44 of 294 attacks were recorded in Medveđa between June 21, 1999 and November 12, 2000. Thereafter, the situation has stabilized.
The municipality of Medveđa had a great depopulation in the past 50 years, having nearly 25,000 inhabitants in 1961 and only 7,438 according to the last census done in 2011. The majority of municipality's population are Serbs, numbering more than 85%. Other ethnic groups include Albanians, Montenegrins and Roma people. Also, 43.5% of inhabitants live in urban areas. The ethnic composition of the municipality:
Aside from the town of Medveđa, the municipality includes the following settlements:
The municipality of Medveđa is one of the least developed municipalities in Serbia. It has many natural advantages for tourism development, because it is near the spa resort with dozens of mineral springs in Sijarinska Spa, and Tulare.
On its territory there are mineral resources for mining, semi-precious stones and marble-onyx. The most promising branch of industry is mining, having mine and flotation "Lece", within the Group Farmakom. It has also solid prospects for development in agriculture and industries such as livestock (sheep, goats, cows) and fruit (plums, pears, apples, quince), also the timber industry and processing.
Seats in the municipality parliament won in the 2012 local elections:
Group of Citizens "For North Jablanica" (16)
Party for Democratic Action (6)
Democratic Party (6)
United Regions of Serbia (4)
Serbian Progressive Party (3)
Zenel Hajdini, Partisan fighter and the biggest activist in Yugoslavia who fight for Albanians freedom and against chetik movement, Hero of Kosovo and People's Hero of Yugoslavia
Hashim Hajdini, Soldier and martyr of Kosovo
Florim Rushiti Kingji, Soldier of Kosovo Liberation Army and martyr of Kosovo
Veli Dedi, former General Major of Albania, former member of Parliament of Albania, Hero of Albania, Hero of Kosovo and International Brigades Garibaldi Battalion Commander and Hero
Idriz Ajeti, member of Academy of Sciences and Arts of Kosovo
Ramadan Xhema, Albanian-American activist for Kosovo Independence
Jim Xhema, Albanian-American billionaire, businessman, owner of Xhema Construction and activist for Kosovo Independence
Hajdar Xhema, Doctor of US President
Fadil Ismajli, former Minister of Economic Development of Kosovo and former CEO of KOSTT
Astrit Ajdarević, football player
Bilall Syla, Commander of Kosovo Liberation Army
