Kashima (鹿嶋市, Kashima-shi) is a city located in Ibaraki Prefecture, in the northern Kantō region of Japan. As of September 2015, the city had an estimated population of 66,860 and a population density of 631 persons per km². Its total area was 106.02 square kilometres (40.93 sq mi). Kashima is the home of the J. League's Kashima Antlers. Its home field, Kashima Soccer Stadium, was used as a site during the 2002 FIFA World Cup. The city is also the site of the Kashima Shrine, a Shinto shrine which is considered the birthplace of many influential styles of Japanese swordsmanship ( Kenjutsu ). It is one of the oldest shrines in eastern Japan.
Kashima is located in southeastern Ibaraki Prefecture, bordered by the Pacific Ocean to the east and the Kitaura portion of Lake Kasumigaura to the west. It is approximately 110 kilometers to the northeast of Tokyo.
Ibaraki Prefecture
Itako
Kamisu
Namegata
Hokota
Kashima was developed from the Nara period together with the Ichinomiya of Hitachi Province, Kashima Shrine. After the Meiji restoration, the town of Kashima was established with the creation of the municipalities system on April 1, 1889 within Kashima District. In 1954, Kashima annexed with the neighboring villages of Takamatsu, Toyosu, Toyosato and Namino. Kashima merged with the village of Ono on September 1, 1995 and was elevated to city status.
Kashima is the central city of the Kashima Industrial Zone, and it has a large industrial park with about 1500 factories, especially petrochemical and steel plants. The Japanese government created this zone in 1963, and the development was mostly completed in 1973.
Kashima has 12 elementary schools, six middle schools, and four high schools.
There is local football club Kashima Antlers.
JR East – Kashima Line
Kashimajingū - Kashima Soccer Stadium
Kashima Rinkai Railway Ōarai Kashima Line
Kashimanada - Kashima-Ōno - Chōjagahamashiosaihamanasukōenmae - Kōyadai - Kashima Soccer Stadium
Japan National Route 51
Japan National Route 124
Port of Kashima
 – Seogwipo, Jeju Province, Republic of Korea, since November 2003 
 – Yancheng, Jiangsu Province, China, since November 2008
Kashima Shrine
Ryuta Sasaki – professional soccer player
Hitoshi Sogahata – professional soccer player
Yuichi Nemoto – professional soccer player
Yasutaka Nomoto – professional soccer player
Juri Takahashi – singer
Yoko Matsugane – gravure idol
