Sibusiso Wiseman Zuma (born 23 June 1975 in Durban, KwaZulu-Natal) is a former South African professional football player playing for Supersport United in the Premier Soccer League.
Zuma started his career for South African clubs Mighty Pa, African Wanderers and Orlando Pirates. In June 2000, he joined Danish club FC København, where he blossomed as a player. He helped the club win its second Danish football championship and was voted into the club's hall of fame for his outstanding efforts in the 2004–05 season, and in 2001 Zuma was tied for 29th place for the 2001 FIFA World Player of the Year award. After five and a half years at FC København, Zuma was sold to German Bundesliga club Arminia Bielefeld for one million euros in July 2005.
In 2006 Zuma was voted number one by the fans among the greatest profiles to have ever played in FC Copenhagen.
According to Zuma he played his best football at FC Copenhagen which still feels like his second home. He enjoys legend status at FC Copenhagen as the best player ever to play in the club. Zuma thinks he owes everything to FC Copenhagen and that he enjoyed every day he was at the club. It is a part of his life that he will never forget. Zuma also tells that "South Africans will tell you that Zuma is a king in Denmark".
FC Copenhagen won its second Superliga championship in 2001 after almost a decade without becoming champions, winning 3–1 in the last New Firm match of the season, at the Parken Stadium. The 2–0 goal was a bicycle kick by Zuma, who received the ball at his chest, where he bounced it in the air, and in the same motion executed the overhead kick, volleying the ball into the far corner, out of Brøndby keeper Mogens Krogh's reach. This was voted the Danish goal of the year, and was voted the best Superliga goal of the decade in December 2009.
On 3 March 2013, Zuma was in episode three out of six about the transformation history of FC Copenhagen's mascot Løven Leo (The Lion Leo) and the regaining of his roar which he had lost. Zuma called for Leo and told him to follow him. Zuma helped Leo to find out who he really was and said: "You are a lion. A Copenhagen lion. You must never forget it, but you must train to become the king of Copenhagen". Then Zuma yelled to Leo: "Pass the ball" and Zuma made a bicycle kick which was a retake on his famous ditto which he scored for FC Copenhagen. The ball hit a caveman which was dressed in yellow and blue – the colours of FC Copenhagens arch rivals Brøndby IF. The video ended with Zuma telling Leo that he has done well but that this is only the beginning. Zuma then said, "go Leo, go and become the lion you were meant to be. Do it for your fans. Do it for the players. Do it for me Zuma. But come back one day because it's kind of lonely here." In the video Zuma was the one that gave Leo back his confidence by training him.
In 2013, Zuma's bicycle kick was voted the greatest moment in the history of FC Copenhagen. A monument was made to honour the greatest moment and thereby Zuma's bicycle kick. Zuma himself was invited by FC Copenhagen and attended Parken on 18 August 2013 where the unveiling of the monument took place. The monument was a relief of Zuma's bicycle kick.
On the day of the unveiling of the relief Zuma said: "It's an honour to be here. I love those guys. I love FC Copenhagen fans to dead. I am amazingly happy. It's one of the best days in my life".
On 21 June 2008 Zuma signed for Mamelodi Sundowns. He was released in the summer of 2009 and in October 2009 he had a trial period with FC Nordsjælland, eventually being signed by the club.
On 16 October he signed a one-year contract with the Danish club FC Nordsjælland. On 8 November 2009 Zuma scored his first goal for FC Nordsjælland in the club's 1–0 win over SønderjyskE. When FC Nordsjælland visited FC København on 24 March 2010 in a Danish League match, Zuma played well and was substituted to a large majority of the FC København supporters applauding him. A distinctly touched Zuma claimed that the home supporters were incredible.
He has represented South Africa 67 times. He played for his country at the 2002 FIFA World Cup. Zuma was the captain of South African National team at the 2006 African Cup of Nations tournament.
In 2010, Zuma opened the Sibusiso Zuma Foundation which works with young kids with HIV. The foundation also works with "prevention and education about HIV/Aids" and "the prevention of HIV infection and/or the distribution of information relating to HIV/Aids".
Zuma says: "I'm just trying to help a lot of communities here in South Africa. Especially the poor ones."
He is also known as "Zuma the Puma" to the club's supporters and "Puma" appears on his shirt instead of "Zuma" in the Pro Evolution Soccer 2009 video game.
Other nicknames while he played in FC Copenhagen was Sibu or just Zuma.
On 25 June 2007, it was reported that Zuma had been involved in an incident in his home country South Africa. After an altercation there were allegations that he threatened to shoot a group of men at a party in Kokstad. The local police investigated the situation, and Zuma was prevented from leaving the country for a period, but no charges were made.
