The 2022 Winter Olympics, officially known as the XXIV Olympic Winter Games (Chinese: 第二十四届冬季奥林匹克运动会; pinyin: Dì Èrshísì Jiè Dōngjì Àolínpǐkè Yùndònghuì), and commonly known as Beijing 2022, is a multi-sport event that will take place in and around Beijing from 4 to 20 February 2022. It will be the third consecutive Olympic Games held in East Asia, after Pyeongchang 2018 and Tokyo 2020. Having previously hosted the 2008 Summer Olympics, Beijing will become the first city ever to host both the Summer and Winter Olympics. It will also become the largest city ever to host the Winter Olympics, a distinction currently held by Vancouver, which hosted the 2010 Winter Olympics.
As well, it will become the first Olympic Winter Games ever to be held in China. The estimated budget of the games is $3.9 billion, less than one tenth of the $43 billion spent on the 2008 Summer Olympics.
The bidding calendar was announced by the IOC in October 2012, with the application deadline set for 14 November 2013. The IOC Executive Board reviewed the bids from all applicant cities on 7 July 2014, and selected Oslo (Norway), Almaty (Kazakhstan) and Beijing (China) as the final candidate cities. Oslo withdrew its bid on 1 October 2014, leaving Almaty and Beijing as the 2 remaining candidates. Beijing was selected as host city of the 2022 Winter Olympics after beating Almaty by 4 votes, on 31 July 2015, at the 128th IOC Session in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
The Beijing Olympic Games Bidding Committee unveiled the venue plan for the 2022 Winter Olympic Games on 20 February 2014: five ice events will be held at the Olympic center, the Capital Indoor Stadium and the Beijing Wukesong Sports Center, which were some of the main venues of the 2008 Summer Olympics. Competitions for luge, bobsleigh and alpine skiing will be held in Xiaohaituo Mountain area in Yanqing northwest of Beijing, 90 kilometres (56 miles) away from the city center using artificial snow given the rarity of natural snow in this region  All other skiing events will be held in Taizicheng Area in Chongli, Zhangjiakou, within sight of the Great Wall, 220 km (140 mi) from downtown Beijing and 130 km (81 mi) away from Xiaohaituo Mountain Area.
Olympic Green venues
Beijing National Aquatics Center – curling existing/ renovated
Beijing National Indoor Stadium – ice hockey existing
Beijing National Stadium – opening and closing ceremonies 80,000 existing
Beijing Olympic Village
National Speed Skating Oval – speed skating 12,000 new
China National Convention Center – MPC/IBC existing
Other venues
Capital Indoor Stadium – figure skating, short track speed skating 15,000 existing
Wukesong Sports Centre – ice hockey existing
Xiaohaituo Alpine Skiing Field – alpine skiing
Xiaohaituo Bobsleigh and Luge Track – bobsleigh, luge, skeleton new
Yanqing MMC: Media Center
Yanqing Olympic Village new
Chongli will stage most of the skiing events during the 2022 Winter Olympics. The ski resort has earned over 1.54 billion yuan (237.77 million U.S. dollars) in tourism from the 2015-2016 snow season for a 31.6 percent growth over the previous season. In 2016 it was announced that Chongli has received 2.185 million tourists for an increase of 30 percent during the first snow season after the winning the Olympic bid. The snow season lasted for five months from November, during which Chongli has hosted 36 competitions and activities, such as Far East Cup and Children Skiing International Festival. A total of 23 skiing camps have also been set up, attracting the participation of 3,800 youths. All venue construction will start in November 2016 and will be finished by the end of 2020 to enable the city to hold test events.
Kuyangshu Biathlon Field – cross-country skiing, Nordic combined (cross-country skiing)
Kuyangshu Ski Jumping Field – ski jumping, Nordic combined (ski jumping)
Hualindong Ski Resort – biathlon
Genting Hotel – Media Center
Genting Ski Resort – snowboarding (slopestyle, halfpipe), freestyle skiing
Taiwu Ski Resort – snowboarding (cross), freestyle skiing
Wanlong Ski Resort – snowboarding (parallel slalom)
Zhangjiakou Olympic Village new
The new Beijing-Zhangjiakou Intercity Railway will be built, starting from Beijing North Railway Station, and terminating at Zhangjiakou South Railway Station. It will be built for speeds up to 350 km/h (217 mph), and travel from Beijing to Zhangjiakou is estimated to take 50 minutes.
The Beijing Subway is expected to continue expanding and projected to have at least 24 lines by 2022. Expressway and highway networks are also expected to be upgraded.
A new second airport for Beijing and the region, tentatively known as Beijing Daxing International Airport, is expected to open by 2019.
The Zhangjiakou Cluster is about 160 km from Beijing
The Yanqing Cluster is about 85 km from Beijing
Fifteen sports are scheduled in the 2022 Winter Olympics program. Skating will include three disciplines – figure skating, speed skating and short track speed skating – while skiing will be represented by six disciplines – alpine skiing, cross-country skiing, freestyle skiing, Nordic combined, ski jumping and snowboarding. Bobsleigh events will be contested in both bobsleigh and skeleton disciplines. The remaining four sports are biathlon, curling, ice hockey and luge.
Broadcast rights to the 2022 Winter Olympics in some countries were already sold as part of long-term broadcast rights deals. In France and the United Kingdom, the 2022 Winter Olympics will be the first that are subject to the exclusive pan-European rights held by Discovery Communications that last between 2018 and 2024. In the United Kingdom, to comply with anti-siphoning laws, Discovery will be required to sub-license coverage to a terrestrial network, such as former rightsholder BBC.
 Asia – Dentsu (Rights to be sold to local broadcaster)
 Brazil – Grupo Globo
 Canada – CBC/Radio-Canada, TSN, RDS
 China – CCTV
 Europe – Discovery Communications, Eurosport
 Hungary – MTVA
 Japan – Japan Consortium
 MENA – beIN Sports
 New Zealand – Sky Television
 North Korea – SBS
 Oceania – Sky Television
 South Korea – SBS
 United States – NBC
 United Kingdom – BBC
Several cities withdrew their applications during the bidding process, citing the high costs or the lack of local support to host the 2022 games, leaving Almaty and Beijing as the only candidate cities by 1 October 2014.
The decision to bid for the Olympics was controversial in China (and outside) because Beijing itself, and especially some of the proposed outdoor venues, do not have reliable snowfall in winter for snow sports. Concerns have been raised that snow may need to be transported to the venues at great cost and with uncertain environmental consequences.
The environmental impact of hosting the games near Beijing has been questioned. Some of the proposed venues will be adjacent to the Beijing Songshan National Nature Reserve and part of the same mountain system, and the environmental impact on the nature reserve of construction, and artificially covering parts of the mountain with snow, is uncertain. The Chinese government responded to these concerns by expanding the adjacent Beijing Songshan National Nature Reserve by 31% of its original size.
2014 Summer Youth Olympics in China
2022 Winter Paralympics
2008 Summer Olympics
