Novi Pazar (Serbian Cyrillic: Нови Пазар, lit. "New Bazaar", pronounced [nôʋiː pǎzaːr]) is a city located in southwest Serbia. Novi Pazar is the cultural center of the Bosniaks in Serbia and the historical region of Sandžak. A multicultural area of Muslims and Orthodox Christians, many monuments of both religions, like the Altun-Alem Mosque and the Church of St. Apostles Peter and Paul, are found in the region. As of the 2011 census, the population of the municipal area of Novi Pazar was 100,410, while the city itself had a population of 66,527.
During 14th century under the old Serbian fortress of Stari Ras, an important marked-place named Trgovište started to develop. By the middle of 15th century, in the time of final Turkish conquest of Old Serbia, another market-place was developing some 11 km to the East. Older place became known as Staro Trgovište (Old Trgovište, in Turkish: Eski Pazar) and younger as Novo Trgovište (New Trgovište, in Turkish: Yeni Pazar). The later developed into modern city of Novi Pazar.
The name of Novi Pazar (meaning "new marketplace) was thus derived from Serbian placename Novo Trgovište (meaning 'new market'), via Turkish placename Yeni Pazar (meaning "new market"), which itself is derived from bazaar (from Persian بازار (bāzār), meaning "market"; from Middle Persian بهاچار (bahā-chār), meaning "place of prices"). It is still known as Yeni Pazar in modern-day Turkey.
Novi Pazar is located in the valleys of the Jošanica, Raška, Deževska, and Ljudska rivers at the elevation of 496m, in southeast Sandžak region. The city is surrounded by Golija and Rogozna mountains; Pešter plateau lies southeast from the city. The total area of the municipality is 742 km². It contains over 100 settlements, mostly small and spread over hills and mountains surrounding the city. The largest surrounding village is Mur with over 3000 residents.
One of the oldest monuments of the area is the Church of the Apostles Peter and Paul first built in the Roman era. The capital city of the Principality of Serbia, Ras, which was ruled by the Vlastimirović dynasty from 768 to 980 is found near the city and has been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. In the next centuries, the region of modern Novi Pazar served as the principal province of the Serbian realm. It was an administrative division under the direct rule of the monarch and sometimes as an appanage. It was the crownland, seat or appanage of various Serbian states throughout the Middle Ages, among the Serbian Kingdom (1217-1345) and the Serbian Empire (1345-1371). In 1427, the region and the remnant of Ras, as part of the Serbian Despotate was ruled by Serbian despot Đurađ Branković. One of the markets was called "despotov trg" (Despot's square). In 1439, the region was captured by Ottoman Empire, but was reconquered by the Serbian Despotate in 1444. In the summer of 1455, the Ottomans annexed the region again, and named the settlement of Trgovište Eski Bazar (Old Market).
Novi Pazar was formally founded as a city in its own right in 1461 by Ottoman general Isa-Beg Isaković, the Bosnian governor of the district (sanjak) and founder of Sarajevo. Isa-Beg Isaković decided to establish a new town on the area of Trgovište as an urban center between Raška and Jošanica, where at first he built a mosque, a public bath, a marketplace, a hostel, and a compound.
It was the chief town of the Ras province (vilayet until its disestablishment in 1463, when it became part of the Jeleč Vilayet). The first written document which mentions Novi Pazar dates from the 15th century, and describes the decision of the Republic of Ragusa to appoint a consul there. Thus the town was already developed at that time, being at the intersection of important routes leading to Dubrovnik, Niš, Sofia, Constantinople, Salonica, Sarajevo, Belgrade and Budapest. The town also remained the capital of the Sanjak of Novi Pazar, which continued until the 20th century as a constitutive unit of Bosnia Eyalet. The sanjak was occupied and administered by Austria-Hungary from 1878. In 1908 it was returned to the Ottoman Empire, but taken over by Serbia in 1912 during the First Balkan War. Nikola Bošković (1642–1721), the father of the famous Ragusan scientist Ruđer Bošković (1711–1787), migrated to Novi Pazar, where he spent the last years of his life.
From 1877 to 1913, Novi Pazar was part of the Kosovo Vilayet. The former Sanjak of Novi Pazar contained a large number of Albanians and Muslim Slavs with a differing culture of the Serbs.
A report from a journalist active at the time stated that when the Serb forces entered the Sandjaz of Novi Pazar, they pacified the Albanians.
In 1913, Novi Pazar became part of the Kingdom of Serbia, and as such, became part of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1918. From 1929 to 1941, Novi Pazar was part of the Zeta Banovina of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia.
In the Battle for Novi Pazar fought at the end of 1941 during the Second World War the Chetniks, initially supported by the Partisans, tried to capture Novi Pazar but eventually failed.
Today, Novi Pazar is the main economic and cultural centre, as well as the largest town, in the Sandžak region.
From the 15th century to the Balkan Wars, Novi Pazar was the capital of the sanjak of Novi Pazar. Typically, like other centres of the wider area, its composition was multiethnic, with Albanians, Serbs and Bosniaks as the main communities. The Ottoman travel writer Evliya Celebi noted that it was one of the most populated towns in the Balkans in the 17th century. Serbs also lived in the city until WWII when the entire Serb population of Novi Pazar - 521 individuals, were imprisoned, sent to the concentration camp Staro Sajmište and killed during the rule of Balli Kombetar.
According to the last official census done in 2011, the Municipality of Novi Pazar has 100,410 inhabitants, while the city itself has 68,749 inhabitants. Most of Novi Pazar’s population are Bosniaks (77.13%) while 68.47% of the municipality’s population is urban. Population density on the territory of the municipality is 135.32 inhabitants per square kilometer.
As of the 2011 census the religious make up of the Municipality of Novi Pazar was 82.4% Muslims, and 16% Orthodox Christians.
Ethnic composition of the municipality:
Ethnic composition of the city:
Aside from the town of Novi Pazar, the municipality includes the following settlements, with population from the 2002 census:
Novi Pazar is governed by a city assembly composed of 47 councillors, a mayor and vice-mayor. After the last legislative election held in 2012, the local assembly is composed of the following groups:
European Novi Pazar - Rasim Ljajić (SDP, SDPS (18)
Party of Democratic Action of Sandžak (11)
Bošnjačka demokratska zajednica Sandžaka - Muamer Zukorlić (10)
Aleksandar Vučić - Srbija pobeđuje (5)
Mirsad Đerlek - SNP (3)
Lying on crossroads between numerous old and new states, Novi Pazar has always been a strong trade center. Along with the trade, the city developed manufacturing tradition. During the 20th century, it became a center of textile industry.
Paradoxically, during the turbulent 1990s and, Novi Pazar prospered, even during the UN sanctions, boosted by the strong private initiative in textile industry. Jeans of Novi Pazar, first of forged trademarks, and later on its own labels, became famous throughout the region. However, during the relative economic prosperity in Serbia of the 2000s, the Novi Pazar economy collapsed, with demise of large textile combines in mismanaged privatization, and incoming competition from the import.
The old Serb Orthodox monastery of Sopoćani, the foundation of St. King Uroš I, built in the second half of the 13th century and located west of Novi Pazar, is a World Heritage Site since 1979 accompanying with Stari Ras (Old Ras), a medieval capital of the Serbian great župan Stefan Nemanja.
The city also houses an old church from the 9th-century Church of St. Peter. On a hilltop overlooking Novi Pazar is the 12th century monastery of Đurđevi stupovi, long left in ruin, but recently restored and with a monastic community using it, with plate glass to keep out the weather and preserve the fine frescos. The main mosque of the city, the Altun-Alem Mosque, is the largest in this region of the Balkans and dates from 16th century. There are various other historic Ottoman buildings, such as the 17th-century Amir-agin Han, a 15th-century Hammam, and the 15th-century Turkish fortress (all gone but the walls, the site of which is now a walled park in the city centre).
Novi Pazar is home to two universities, the University of Novi Pazar and the State University of Novi Pazar.
The city's football club FK Novi Pazar was founded in 1928, under the name "FK Sandžak", which later changed to "FK Deževa". The club has played under its current name since 1962, when Deževa and another local football club, FK Ras, unified under this name. The club was a SFRJ amateur champion, and a member of the Yugoslav Second League. FK Novi Pazar qualified for a promotional play-off twice, but lost both times (to FK Sutjeska Nikšić in 1994, and to FK Sloboda Užice in 1995). FK Novipazar finally promoted to Serbian SuperLiga in 2011-12 season. FK Novi Pazar is the oldest second-league team in Serbia. Football is still extremely popular sport in Novi Pazar and city stadium is always full. The President of FK Novi Pazar is Rasim Ljajic, a minister in the government of the Republic of Serbia.
Volleyball clubs in the city are OK Novi Pazar (first league) and OK Koteks.
Handball club is in second league and used to have name "Ras" but it was changed in RK Novi Pazar in 2004.
Famous athletes from the city include Turkish basketball national team player Mirsad Jahović Türkcan, former football player of Besiktas Sead Halilagić, handball-player Mirsad Terzić (who represents Bosnia and Herzegovina) and young football players Adem Ljajić, Ediz Bahtiyaroğlu, and alpinist Basar Čarovac who climbed all seven continents' highest peaks.
Basar Čarovac, alpinist
Abdulah Gegić former Partizan Belgrade football coach
Almir Gegić, football player
Aćif Hadžiahmetović politician, mayor of Novi Pazar during Second World War
Emina Jahović, pop singer
Tahir Efendi Jakova, Albanian poet
Adem Ljajić, FC Internazionale football player
Rasim Ljajić, Republic of Serbia Minister of Foreign and Domestic Trade and Telecommunications
Mladen Majdak, volleyball player, currently playing for Tourcoing Lille Métropole Volley-Ball
Miljan Mutavdžić professional football player and former Serbian national team player
Mirsad Đerlek politician, mayor of Novi Pazar during 2008
Laza Ristovski (1956-2007), Yugoslav keyboardist, member of Smak and Bijelo Dugme
Milunka Savić (1888–1973), the most-decorated female combatant in the entire history of warfare
Elma Sinanović, pop singer
Haris Skarep, pop singer
Mirsad Jahović Türkcan, Turkish basketball player of Yugoslav origin
Bajro Župić, former Partizan Belgrade football player
Bosniaks of Serbia
Novi Pazar Municipality
Sandžak
