Benavente is a municipality in the north of the province of Zamora, in the autonomous community Castile and León of Spain. It has about 20,000 inhabitants.
Located north of the capital on an important communications hub, it was repopulated by King Ferdinand II of León, who also awarded it law-codes (a fuero) in 1167. It was originally known as Malgrat.
Benavente is located in the North of Province of Zamora, in the North-West of Spain. It is 65 km away from Zamora City and 260 km from Madrid and its coordinates are 42° 0' N 5° 41' W.
The adjacent municipalities of Benavente are Villanueva de Azoague, Manganeses de la Polvorosa, Santa Cristina de la Polvorosa, Villabrázaro, San Cristóbal de Entreviñas, Castrogonzalo, Santa Colomba de las Monjas and Arcos de la Polvorosa, all of them belonging to Province of Zamora.
Benavente is connected to the national road network through different roads and highways:
 A-66  · Autovía Ruta de la Plata: Gijón - Oviedo - Mieres - Puerto Pajares - León - Benavente - Zamora - Salamanca - Béjar - Plasencia - Cáceres - Mérida - Sevilla.
 A-6  · Autovía del Noroeste. Madrid - Benavente - Lugo - A Coruña - Arteixo
 Autovía A-52  · Autovía de las Rías Bajas. Benavente - Sanabria - Verín - Ourense - Vigo .
 N-610 · Palencia-Benavente.
Bus services are provided in the Bus Station by different companies like Alsa, Auto-Res, Empresa Vivas, Linecar or Autocares Julio Fernández. There is a taxi stand in the Bus Station.
Diary services to: A Coruña, Astorga, Algeciras, Asturias (Oviedo-Gijón), Ávila, Badajoz, Barcelona, Bilbao, Cáceres, Cádiz, Cangas de Narcea, Irún, La Bañeza, León, Lugo, Logroño, Málaga, Madrid, Mérida, Ourense, Monforte, Palencia, Plasencia, Ponferrada, Pontevedra, Salamanca, San Fernando, San Sebastián, Santiago de Compostela, Sevilla, Valladolid, Verín, Vigo, Villablino, Zafra, Zamora and Zaragoza.
Switzerland
Germany
Belgium
Holland
France - (París)
France (Lyon - Grenoble)
Andorra
Alcubilla de Nogales
Alija del Infantado
Arcos de la Polvorosa
Ayoo de Vidriales
Camarzana de Tera
Carracedo - 13:00
Cubo de Benavente
Ferreras de Abajo
Milles de la Polvorosa
Molezuelas
Mozar
Puebla de Sanabria
Pueblica de Valverde
Santa Colomba de las Monjas
Santibáñez de Vidriales
Tábara
Uña de Quintana
Valle del Tera
Valderas
Villafáfila
Villalpando
Villanueva de Azoague
Villarrín de Campos
Senior citizens have a free urban bus service.
The town has several taxi stands, one of them in the Bus Station.
Parador de Turismo Fernando II, which occupies the Caracol Tower, a 16th-century castle with wide segmental miradors and a Mudéjar coffered ceiling in the main section
Church of Santa María de Azogue, in Romanesque style, begun in 1180. It has a Latin cross plan, with a nave and two aisles, separated by cruciform pilasters, with five apses. The nave has Gothic cross vaults added in the 16th century. The interior is home of several Gothic sculptures, such as that of the "Annunciation" (13th century)
San Juan del Mercado, in Romanesque style (12th-13th centuries). It has three decorated portals with the Adoration of the Magi, the Virgin and Child and scenes of the birth of Jesus.
Hospital of La Piedad, an old pilgrim hostel.
Hermitage of Soledad (early 16th century)
Caracol Tower
Fiestas de la Veguilla. The local celebration in honour of the Virgen de la Vega to celebrate the torno al llamado (Monday of Pascuilla).
Fiestas del toro enmaromado. Celebrated the day before the corpus, where the young men run (Running of the Bulls) in front of a long rope held on the horns of a bull.
"Parador de Turismo Rey Fernando II de León" (H****) Paseos de la Mota, s/n
"Villa de Benavente" (H ****) Avda. de las Américas, s/n
"Santiago" (H ***) Avda. Maragatos, 34
"Orense" (H **) C/ San Antón Viejo, 4
"Arenas" (H *) Ctra. de Madrid, Km 261
"Hostal Avenida" (HS**) Avda. El Ferial, 17
"Bristol" (HS**) C/ Santa Cruz, 44.
"Universal" (HS**) C/ Sancti Spíritus, 17
"Alameda" (HS**) Autovía Madrid - Coruña km. 262
"Covadonga" (HS**) Avenida Federico Silva, 16
"Paradero 3" (HS*) Autovía Madrid – Coruña Km 261
"Paraíso" (HS *) C/ los Herreros, 64
"La Trucha" (HS) C/ la Viña, 5
"Jara" (HS) Autovía Madrid-Coruña km. 261
"Pensión La Trapería" (P) C/Agujero de San Andrés, 10
It is characterized as a Mediterranean climate with continental characteristics as with the altitude of the municipality and its distance to the sea. However, the amount of the winter frosts is lifted, taking place even in spring, with the consequential damage to some of the local agriculture.
 Puebla de Zaragoza, Puebla, México.
 Vila Real, Portugal.
José Carlos Guerra, painter.
Maria Josefa Alfonso Pîmentel Tellez Girón Borja y Centelles, fourteenth Countess and twelfth Duchess of Benavente, a patron of Goya and Boccherini
Fray Toribio de Benavente o Motolinía (1477–1569), a missionary to Mexico
Alonso Briceño, one of the thirteen conquistadors led by Francisco Pizarro
Pita Pizarro (1792–1845), a minister of Isabella II of Spain
Francisco de Castro Pascual (1871–1949), microbiologist
José Nuñez Pernía (1805–1879), a Marquis of Nuñez and the first president of the Sociedad Hahnemanniana Matritense
Pedro Nuñez Granés (1869–1944), engineer
Celestino Alonso Rodríguez Valdespino (1828–1875), chess player
Federico Silva Muñoz (1923–1997), politician
Laura Iglesias Romero, a scientist who does research for the CSIC
Francisco Jose Yndurain Muñoz (1940–2008), scientist
Almudena Fernández (born 1977), model
Regional speech is influenced by Leonese language.
"Reina Sofía" Theatre.
"Multicines Benavente" Cinema.
List of municipalities in Zamora
San Pedro De Zamudia, Zamora
Sandin, Zamora
Almudena Fernandez - Famous model from Benavente.
