Casabona is a comune and town with a population of about 4,000 people in the province of Crotone, in Calabria, southern Italy.
Founded by Philoctetes, who because of a sedition, was driven from his city by a revolt and emigrated to Italy, founded Petilia, then left to found Old Crimissa and Chone. The ancient name of Casabona was Chone Chrone was part of Magna Graecia.
In 1300, it was the last town in the fiefs of the Abenante family; in 1472, it was passed to Diego di Cavaniglia, count of Montella. After the invasion of the Kingdom of Naples by Charles VIII of France, it was sold to the House of Aragon.
By 1807, the town had become part of Napoleon's empire although it had communal autonomy. Later it follows the history of the restored Kingdom of the Two Sicilies.
Casabona, former Casinova, Terra Casiboni, Casalbuono, names all derived from the Latin Casabundia, "next to fall." Indeed, Casabona, according to some, it was destroyed by an earthquake in 1638, according to others by the earthquake of 1783. Each other, however, agree that after the earthquake was standing only the Convent of San Bernardino, around which gathered a part of the population (one hundred fire) whereas other families had moved to Belvedere Malapezza (Belvedere), a Monte Spinel (Spinel) and Rocca di Neto. Some remained in the old town which was so called "Casabona the old" these families, then finally left the site to move into the settlement that ended with the name "Casabona the new." According to Strabo may be the ancient Chone, but it sure has been very remote origins, as witnessed by the findings of which are littered the area. It was certainly well populated by soldiers Reres after 1446, and in particular the fraction Zinga, a neighboring Pallagorio. During the French period was first linked to Cirò Strongoli and then, in 1807 had the municipal autonomy.
The village is situated on a hill of tufa, and its sea territory extends along the valleys of the Neto vitro. In the area eradicated malaria, favored by the Agrarian Reform, the irrigation of the Left and Neto dall'acquedotto the injured, the property is predominantly agricultural, with adequate production of oil, wine, cereals, beans, citrus fruits, ortalizi. Intensive rearing of livestock.
