Kizugawa (木津川市, Kizugawa-shi) is a city located in southern Kyoto Prefecture, Japan. It is the southernmost city in the prefecture and it is named after the Kizu River, a tributary of the Yodo River, which runs through the city. Kizugawa City is a part of the Kansai Science City project and houses research facilities of several corporations, including Rohto Pharmaceutical and Omron.
Kizugawa City is one of the few municipalities in Japan with a growing population. In a population estimate released by the Japan Policy Council, Kizugawa City is the only municipality in Kyoto Prefecture predicted to have a positive population growth rate by 2040.
The modern city was established on March 12, 2007, from the merger of the towns of Kamo, Kizu and Yamashiro (all from Sōraku District).
In the Nara period, Emperor Shōmu moved the capital from Heijō-kyō to Kuni-kyō, which was located on Kizugawa City's ground. Kuni-kyō served as the capital for 5 years from 740 to 744. Its ruins can be found in Kamo area. Now, Kizugawa City is a part of the national Kansai Science City project.
Kizugawa City is located on the southern border of Kyoto Prefecture. The Kizu River, from which the city inherits its name, runs through the city.
Being a part of the Kansai Science City project, Kizugawa City houses over 20 enterprises and research facilities including:
Rohto Pharmaceutical (ロート製薬)
Omron (オムロン)
Sekisui House (積水ハウス)
Fukujyuen (福寿園)
Ataka Daiki Engineering (アタカ大機)
Tatsuta Electric Wire Cable Co. (タツタ電線)
M-system (エム・システム)
Manyo Tools (マンヨーツール)
Mizuho Co. (株式会社ミズホ)
Solno Leaves Co. (ソルノリーブス)
Kyoto Press Industrial Co. (京都プレス工業)
Also, Doshisha University Gakkentoshi Campus(学研都市キャンパス), which focuses on graduate studies in biomedicine, and Doshisha International School, Kyoto (DISK) are also located in Kizugawa City.
Other public and private research organizations in Kizugawa City include:
International Institute for Advanced Studies (IIAS, 国際高等研究所)
Research Institute of Innovative Technology for the Earth (RITE, 地球環境産業技術研究機構)
Japan Atomic Energy Agency Kansai Photochemistry Research Center (日本原子力研究開発機構 関西光化学研究所)
Kizugawa City serves as a commuter town for Osaka City, Kyoto City, and Nara City. Osaka City and Kyoto City are both within an hour by car or train, and Nara City is reachable in 15 minutes. Kizugawa city currently have JR and Kintetsu railways running through the city and a growing community bus system.
Kizugawa City is a key stop in railway system in Kansai. The JR Nara Line, Gakkentoshi Line, and Kansai Main Line converge at Kizu Station. Also in the west part of the city runs the Kintetsu Kyoto Line.
Kizugawa City Community Bus (木津川市コミュニティバス) and Nara Kotsu Bus (奈良交通バス) run in Kizugawa City.
All Kizugawa City Community Bus buses, excluding Tono Line (当尾線), have a fixed fare. Kizugawa City Community Bus 1-Day Tickets are available at the city hall, branch offices, and on Kizugawa City Community Buses. They are useful for residents and visitors for traveling to several locations in the city.
Kizugawa City is the home of several famous temples including:
Jōruri-ji (浄瑠璃寺): Main Hall, main Buddha image, and 3-story pagoda listed as National Treasures
Kaijyusen-ji (海住山寺): 5-story pagoda listed as a National Treasure
Gansen-ji (岩船寺): 3-story pagoda listed as an Important Cultural Property
Kaniman-ji (蟹満寺): main Buddha image listed as a National Treasure
Other attractions include:
Kuni-kyō Ruins
The Kids' Science Museum of Photons (きっづ光科学館ふぉとん)
Yamashiro Local History Museum (ふるさとミュージアム山城)
Tono Stone Buddha Path(当尾石仏の里)
Doshisha University, Gakkentoshi Campus
Nanyō High School
Kizu Junior High School
Kizu Daini Junior High School
Kizu Minami Junior High School
Izumigawa Junior High School
Yamashiro Junior High School
Kizu Elementary School
Saganaka Elementary School
Takanohara Elementary School
Kizugawadai Elementary School
Saganakadai Elementary School
Umemidai Elementary School
Kunimidai Elementary School
Shiroyamadai Elementary School
Kamo Elementary School
Minami Kamodai Elementary School
Kamikoma Elementary School
Tanakura Elementary School
Doshisha International Academy Elementary School
Kyōtango, Kyoto (From Jan 11, 2008)
Yui Yokoyama, member of AKB48
Hiroyasu Tanaka, Central League baseball player
