Ayumi Morita (森田 あゆみ, Morita Ayumi, born March 11, 1990) is a Japanese tennis player. She reached her career-high ranking of 42nd in the world on June 6, 2011 and is currently the fifth highest ranked Japanese player in the world at world No. 153. At Junior level, she reached a career high ranking of No. 3.
Morita is known for strong and consistent two-handed groundstrokes which she hits very flat. She is also regarded as very tough mentally for a young player, often showing great resolve to win close matches despite a lackluster serve. Morita is a small and quick player with excellent footwork and movement around the court.
Morita is one of the most successful Fed Cup players of recent times with a 23–14 match win record for Japan.
On September 16, 2008, she beat world No. 19 Ágnes Szávay in three sets in the Toray Pan Pacific Open.
On January 5, 2009, Morita upset former Wimbledon quarterfinalist Michaëlla Krajicek in the final round of qualifying to reach the main draw of the ASB Classic in Auckland, New Zealand. She faced third set deficits in all three of her qualifying matches, including a 4–1 deficit in her first match against Katie O'Brien.
Her first tournament of 2011 was the 2011 ASB Classic. She faced Romanian teenager Simona Halep and lost in straight sets despite recovering from being two breaks down in the second set. Her next tournament was the 2011 Moorilla Hobart International. She beat Akgul Amanmuradova. Her next opponent was Bethanie Mattek-Sands, to whom she lost in two sets. Ayumi played at the 2011 Australian Open – Women's Singles where she defeated 27 seed Alexandra Dulgheru in two sets. She defeated wildcard Caroline Garcia in the second round but lost to Peng Shuai in the third round.
At the 2011 Dubai Tennis Championships, Morita qualified by defeating Sophie Lefèvre and Vesna Manasieva. In the first round of the main draw, she defeated No. 14 seed Petra Kvitová in two tiebreaks. Before the match, Kvitová had only lost once in 2011 and had already won two titles. Morita beat Indian wildcard Sania Mirza in the second round before losing to Caroline Wozniacki in the third round.
Morita reached the third round of the Australian Open with straight-sets victories over Anna Tatishvili and Annika Beck, then lost to Serena Williams on Rod Laver Arena.
