Saint Peter Port is the capital of Guernsey as well as the main port. The population in 2001 was 16,488. In Guernésiais and in French, historically the official language of Guernsey, the name of the town and its surrounding parish is St Pierre Port. The "port" distinguishes this parish from Saint Pierre Du Bois.
As well as being a parish, St. Peter Port is a small town consisting mostly of steep narrow streets and steps on the overlooking slopes. It is known that a trading post/town has existed here since before Roman times, the pre-Christian name of which has not survived into the modern era.
The postal code for addresses in this parish starts with GY1.
People from St. Peter Port, were nicknamed "les Villais" (the townspeople) or "cllichards" in Guernésiais.
St. Peter Port is located on the east coast of Guernsey. It borders St. Sampson in the north, The Vale in the north-west, St. Andrew in the west and St. Martin in the south.
On the seaward side it faces Herm to the east, across the Little Russel, and Sark and Brecqhou even further east across the Big Russel between them and Herm. The Bréhon Tower sits in the Little Russel between St. Peter Port and Herm.
Relief The land in the north and by the harbour is low lying but in the south, the land gets much higher (but not as high as St Martin's or the Forest). This means that there are quite a few cliffs on the coast between Havelet and Fermain.
St. Peter Port has an English Isthmian League club, Guernsey F.C. who play at Footes Lane.
Saint Peter Port is subdivided into four cantons:
Canton 1 or North Canton
Canton 2 or Canton of the North-West
Canton 3 or Canton of the South-West
Canton 4 or Canton of the South
In addition, the islands of Herm and Jethou belong to the parish, but are not part of any canton. They belong to Electoral district Saint Peter Port South.
The following main roads (listed from north-south) provide important links between St Peter Port and the other parishes:
Les Banques (leads up the coast to St Sampson's and the north of the island)
Rue des Varendes (leads to the parish of Castel)
Mount Row (leads to St Andrew's and the west of the island)
Ruette Brayes (leads to St Martin's and the south of the island)
Fort Road (leads to St Martin's)
The following coastal roads (listed from north to south) are also very important as they provide access to the shops, carparks and the harbour:
St George's Esplanade
North Esplanade
South Esplanade
Mount Durand
Saint Peter Port comprises two administrative division, St Peter Port South and St Peter Port North.
In the Guernsey general election, 2016 in:
St Peter Port South there was a 2,068 or 63% turnout to elect five Deputies
St Peter Port North there was a 2,639 or 65% turnout to elect six Deputies.
Margaret Ann Neve - The oldest woman in the world until her death in 1903
Sir Isaac Brock – Major General, "Hero of Upper Canada", War of 1812
Matthew Le Tissier, footballer
Alison Merrien MBE, World indoors bowls champion
George Métivier, poet
Heather Watson, tennis player, Team GB athlete and Wimbledon Champion
Victor Hugo, French writer, In exile in St-Peter Port from 1855 to 1870.
Cameron Chalmers, athlete
Guernsey
Parishes of Guernsey
Maritime history of the Channel Islands
