Miyakojima (宮古島市, Miyakojima-shi, Miyako: Myaaku, Okinawan: Naaku) is a City jurisdiction located on several islands in Okinawa Prefecture, Japan.
The modern City of Miyakojima was established on October 1, 2005, from the merger of the old City of Hirara, the Towns of Gusukube, Irabu and Shimoji, and the Village of Ueno (all from Miyako District). As a result of the merger, Miyako District only has one remaining Village.
As of December 2012 the City has an estimated population of 54,908 and a population density of 268.45 per km². The total area is 204.54 km². The City had 24,728 households. The mayor of Miyakojima is Toshihiko Shimoji (born 1945), who took office in the second mayoral election of the City in 2009.
The islands administered by the City of Miyakojima include:
Miyako-jima
Ikemajima
Ōgamijima
Irabujima
Shimojishima
Kurimajima
The City of Miyakojima is served by two airports. Miyako Airport (MMY), the main commercial airport, is located on Miyako Island; and Shimoji Airport, initially a private field, is now a Class 3 facility operated by the Prefectural government located on Shimojishima. This nearby island is close enough to be connected by a causeway bridge to the larger Miyako Island.
Arata Tomori, TV personality and doctor
Erika Sunakawa, singer
Hideki Irabu, baseball player
Isamu Shimoji, singer
Katsuyoshi Tomori, golfer
Kazumasa Uesato, footballer
Kenya Tomori, basketball player
Masanobu Kikukawa, martial artist
Mikio Shimoji, politician
Osamu Shimabukuro, basketball player
Tadashi Kakihana, announcer
Japan Airlines maintains a ticketing office on Miyakojima island in Miyakojima city. It is only for domestic flights.
In 1873, the German ship Robertson was shipwrecked on Miyako Island. The crew were saved and cared for by the local islanders. As a gift for the islanders' kindness, and as an excuse for German warships to enter Ryūkyūan waters, Kaiser Wilhelm I erected a monument on the island in 1876, known locally as the German Emperor's Tributary Monument or the Friendship Monument. After Japan annexed the Ryūkyū Kingdom, Japan used this as evidence of a history of friendship between Japan and Germany.
In 1987, the Ueno German Culture Village opened in Ueno village, Miyako. Internet websites under the name Ueno German Cultural Village can be easily found, however Ueno Village, Miyako Island, no longer exists as a jurisdiction since, as mentioned above, all of the separate cities, towns and villages on the island were merged into Miyakojima City in 2005.
The climate of Miyakojima is on the boundary between a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification Af) and a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification Cfa) with very warm summers and mild winters. Precipitation is abundant throughout the year; August is the wettest month, and January and July are the driest.
