Dubai Sports City or DSC a multi-venue sports complex in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, developed by partners Abdul Rahim Al Zarooni, Abdulrahman Bukhatir and Abdulrahman Falaknaz. It provides a mix of residential, retail, leisure and recreational facilities. It is built around five major sports venues and features a number of sports academies. Located on Mohammad Bin Zayed Road the residential aspect of the project consists of mid-rise apartment buildings, townhouses and villas. Sports City contains three distinct residential districts: Canal Residence, Victory Heights and Gallery Villas.
Dubai Sports City contains the following sporting complexes:
Dubai International Cricket Stadium, a 25,000 seat cricket stadium, popularly known as Ring of Fire.
Spanish Soccer Schools, Under the direction of Real Madrid legend Míchel Salgado and his acclaimed international coaching team, Spanish Soccer Schools work with more than 700 children ages 5–16 on techniques and skills to help them play soccer the Spanish way. The head coach of the Spanish Soccer Schools is Inaki Beni, a UEFA Pro Coach who was formerly head coach of Real Madrid’s U9, U11, U12 and U13 teams.
ICC Academy, Facilities include two full-sized (CC Academy Ground & ICC Academy Ground No 2), one-day international floodlit ovals, alongside the ICC Academy’s state-of-the-art building and pitches, which offer indoor and outdoor training facilities. These include technology tools for bowlers and batsmen, practice pitches of different surfaces, and indoor nets. The ICC Academy is the only training complex anywhere in the world to offer South Asian, English and Australian practice turf.
Rugby Park, a 5,000 seat rugby stadium. The newest sports initiative of Dubai Sports City, the Rugby Park provides state-of-the-art, purpose-built facilities for players, coaches, referees, at all levels of the game. The Rugby Park in future will also boast a state-of-the-art high performance gymnasium, world class sports science and rehabilitation facilities as well as a full sports medical clinic.
The Els Club Golf Course is golf park. It is a world's first and is also the first golf course designed by Ernie Els in the Middle East. The course combines a links style golf course with traditional 'classical era' design that features gently rolling fairways with steep greenside bunkers and grass swales.
Hosted DUBAi Open Asian Tour’s final event of 2014
Hosted IPL 7, UAE-Leg in 2014 with all match completely sold-out
Hosted 2 ODI matches between Pakistan and Australia from 22 to 24 April 2009
Hosted 2 Twenty20 matches between Pakistan and New Zealand from 12 to 13 November 2009.
Hosted 2 Indian musical concerts on 1 and 2 November 2009.
Hosted 2 Twenty20 matches between Pakistan and England from 13 to 14 February 2010.
The Els Club,located in Dubai sports city hosted Callaways Odyssey.
Dubai Sports city hosted World Twenty20 qualifier matches in February 2010.
Hosted 3 ODI matches between Pakistan and South Africa from 2 to 8 November 2010.
Hosted a Test match between Pakistan and South Africa on 12 November 2010.
In 2014, The 2014 Indian Premier League tournament was held in the stadium along with Sheikh Zayed Cricket Stadium and Sharjah Cricket Association Stadium then the tournament will be back to homeland India.
ICC Academy is a cricket academy which helps players, coaches, umpires, curators and administrators to focus on progress, training and achievement.
Spanish Soccer Schools is a football academy. It is run by Spanish soccer hero Michel Salgado.
Rugby Academy is a Rugby academy. It focusses on the development of talent throughout all age groups and standards up to and including elite club and international level.
Swimming Academy is swimming academy. It is the first swimming facility in the UAE to have high performance coaching and training resources offered to the sport.
Butch Harmon School of Golf is golf academy. It is run by Butch Harmon who is widely regarded as the best golf coach in the world.
