Jalna district (Marathi: जालना जिल्हा) is an administrative district in the state of Maharashtra in western India. Jalna town is the district headquarters. The district is part of Aurangabad division.
The district is situated in central Maharashtra, in the north of the Marathwada region—one of eight districts—as part Aurangabad division, and is bounded on the north by Jalgaon district, on the east by Parbhani district and Buldhana district, on the south by Beed district and on the west by Aurangabad district.
The district occupies an area of 7,718 square kilometres (2,980 sq mi). The range of geographical latitudes and longitudes of the district is from 19.01' N to 21.03'N and from 75.04'E to 76.04'E, with gently to moderately sloping topography. The Northern part of the district is occupied by the Ajanta and Satmala hill ranges.
The Godavari River flows along the southern boundary of the district, from west to east. The Purna River, one of the major tributaries of the Godavari, also flows through the district. The Dudhana, the principal tributary of the Purna, and the Kelana and the Girija, also tributaries of the Purna, as well as the Gulati and the Kundlika—which has been dammed to create the Ghanewadi Reservoir, which provides water to Jalna city—are other rivers draining the district.
The district is known for Jamb village, the birthplace of Samarth Ramdas Swami. The Battle of Assaye was fought on September 23, 1803 near the village of Assaye located near Jafrabad in this district.
Jalna was formerly a part of the Princely State of Hyderabad and after the Indian independence in 1947, became part of Aurangabad district. On 1 May 1981, the new district was formed by carving out Jalna, Bhokardan, Jafrabad and Ambad talukas (Sub-division) of Aurangabad district and Partur taluka of Parbhani district.
The district was formed during the term of chief minister Abdul Rehman Antulay. The district is divided into two sub-divisions, Jalna and Partur. These are further divided into eight talukas: Jalna, Ambad, Bhokardan, Badnapur, Ghansavangi, Partur, Mantha and Jafrabad. There is a total of 970 villages in the district.
The district has five constituencies of Maharashtra State Vidhan Sabha ( Legislative Assembly):
Partur (Vidhan Sabha constituency)
Ghansawangi (Vidhan Sabha constituency)
Jalna (Vidhan Sabha constituency)
Badnapur (Vidhan Sabha constituency)
Bhokardan (Vidhan Sabha constituency)
While Partur and Ghansawangi are part of Parbhani (Lok Sabha constituency), the other three are part of the Jalna (Lok Sabha constituency).
According to the 2011 census,
Jalna district has a population of 1,958,483, roughly equal to the nation of Lesotho or the US state of New Mexico. This gives it a ranking of 237th in India (out of a total of 640).
The district has a population density of 255 inhabitants per square kilometre (660/sq mi). Its population growth rate over the decade 2001–2011 was 21.84%.
Jalna has a sex ratio of 929 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 73.61%.
Tourism in Marathwada
Institute of Mental Health (Erragadda) - Institute was shifted from Jalna To Hyderabad in 1953 after Hyderabad State (1948–56) was formed.
