Misawa (三沢市, Misawa-shi) is a city located in eastern Aomori Prefecture in the northern Tōhoku region of Japan.
As of September 2015, the city has an estimated population of 39,685 and a population density of 331 persons per km². The total area was 119.87 square kilometres (46.28 sq mi).
Misawa is the location of a large military base, Misawa Air Base, which is under joint operation of the United States Air Force's 35th Fighter Wing, and Japan Air Self-Defense Force's 3rd Fighter Wing. It is also an important US base for signals intelligence and related activities. The city population figures do not include the estimated 10,000 American military personnel and their dependents stationed at Misawa Air Base.
Misawa is located in the flatlands on the southern shore of Lake Ogawara on the east coast of Aomori Prefecture, facing the Pacific Ocean. The city has a cold maritime climate characterized by cool summers and cold winters with heavy snowfall. Misawa has well-defined seasons. Though short, autumn is beautiful with pleasant temperatures, late-blooming flowers, and the changing colors of the trees. Winter gets serious in early December, peaks in January and February (20's to 30's), and starts fading near the end of March. Strong winds often intensify the cold temperatures. Snowfall is erratic, however even the heaviest snowfalls can melt quickly. Icy roads are the greater concern as the sunshine will often melt the ice and then as afternoon temperatures cool down, the water from the melted snow and ice refreezes. As the ice and snow clear and the ground dries, dust storms become a hazard near farm fields. In early spring, the winds switch and come from the east off the ocean. Thick sea fog is common in the morning or early evening. May is usually quite pleasant with warm temperatures. However, it is usually the "calm before the storm" or in this case before the rainy season. The onset of summer usually brings the rainy season. This normally begins in mid-June and continues for an unpredictable period of time. However, it normally clears out around mid to late July. The end of July through August can get quite hot.
The nearest city of any size is Hachinohe which is 30 to 40 minutes away by car. The surrounding area is mostly rural and quite scenic. There is some limited nightlife, mostly concentrated around the American air base nearby. Tokyo is an hour away by air, about 3 and a half hours by train, and about 10–12 hours by car.
Aomori Prefecture
Kamikita District
Rokunohe
Tōhoku
Rokkasho
Oirase
The area around Misawa has been occupied since prehistoric times, and was a major population center for the Emishi people. Numerous Jomon period remains have been discovered within the borders of Misawa, including within the borders of Misawa Air Base. The area was nominally under control of the Northern Fujiwara in the Heian period, and became part of the holdings granted to the Nanbu clan after the defeat of the North Fujiwara by Minamoto Yoritomo in the Kamakura period. The Nanbu established numerous horse ranches, accompanied by numbered fortified settlements. During the Edo period, the area was part of Morioka Domain. After the Meiji Restoration, the area was settled by many dispossessed ex-samurai from former Aizu Domain.
Per the reform of 1889, Misawa Village was created within Kamikita District through the merger of Misawa and Tengamori hamlets. The area was devastated by a tsunami in March 1896. In 1931, in the first successful nonstop transpacific flight, Clyde Pangborn and Hugh Herndon, in the airplane Miss Veedol, took off from Misawa's Sabishiro Beach and landed in present-day East Wenatchee, Washington. Coastal areas of Misawa were again devastated by a tsunami in March 1933. An Imperial Japanese Navy Air Service base was established in 1941, and nearby Lake Ogawara was reportedly one of the lakes used by the Imperial Japanese Navy to practice for the attack on Pearl Harbor due to its shallow depth. The base was heavy bombed by the United States Navy in 1945, and subsequently occupied by the United States after the surrender of Japan at the end of World War II.
On February 11, 1948, the town of Omisawa was founded through the merger of Misawa village with portions of Rokunohe, Shimoda and Uranodate villages. Misawa Airport was opened on January 11, 1952, with Japan Airlines providing scheduled services to Haneda Airport in Tokyo and Chitose Airport in Hokkaidō. The town was elevated to city status on September 1, 1958. Misawa Airport was closed on March 31, 1965. On January 11, 1966, a large fire destroyed most of the center of the city. On August 19, 1969 the 51st annual Japanese High School Baseball Championship was held in Misawa. Misawa Airport reopened on May 10, 1975. In the year 2000, Misawa hosted the winter events for the 55th annual National Sports Festival of Japan.
Misawa serves as a regional industrial and commercial center, with agriculture and commercial fishing playing secondary roles in the local economy. The large foreign presence at Misawa Air Base also makes a large impact on the local economy.
Misawa has seven elementary schools, five middle schools and two high schools.
Misawa High School
Misawa Commercial High School
Aoimori Railway Line
Misawa
Japan National Route 338
Misawa Airport
 East Wenatchee, Washington, United States from August 23, 2001
 Wenatchee, Washington, United States  from October 4, 1981
The city of Misawa boasts many festivals throughout the year, such as the cherry blossom festival, located at "Train Park", the Tanabata festival, and the most local, the Kosuimatsuri, or Lake Ogawara Festival. At the Kosuimatsuri [1], the new Lake Ogawara Queen is reigned; synonymous to "Miss Misawa", which consists of two women from Misawa between the age of 15–25, and one American citizen from Misawa Air Base, of the same age range. Misawa also hosts "Japan Day" within Misawa Air Base, at the base's Collocated Club. There is also "American Day", occurring generally a week or so after Memorial Day, at which time Japanese and American friendship is strengthened through the festive environment of food vendors and a large parade.
Yoko Imai – actress
Koji Ota – professional baseball player
Shinobu Kai – gravure model
Yukio Kakizaki - professional baseball player
Masaya Kitamura – politician
Norio Kimura – professional boxer
Takeshi Kobayashi – computer game creator
Kahoru Kohiruimaki – musician
Takayuki Kohiruimaki – professional kickboxer
Kyōichi Sawada – photojournalist
Akiyoshi Sasaki - professional baseball player
Takanonami Sadahiro – sumo wrestler
Yoshimi Tanaka – Japanese Red Army terrorist
Shūji Terayama – poet, film director
Issei Futamata – voice actor
Nanako Sakurazawa – AV actress
Kazuoki Takahashi – actor, model
