Thibaut Pinot (born 29 May 1990 in Mélisey, Haute-Saône) is a French professional road bicycle racer for UCI ProTeam FDJ. He is rated as one of the most promising talents in French cycling, and ended as third overall in the 2014 Tour de France, and first in the young rider classification in the race.
Pinot, aged 22 was the youngest rider in the 2012 Tour de France. He took a prestigious victory on the eighth stage from Belfort to Porrentruy, which comprised seven categorized climbs including the Category 1 Col de la Croix, where he passed Fredrik Kessiakoff (Astana) shortly before the summit. He then negotiated the descent and the flat portion of road before the finish situated 16 km from the climb. He held on to his lead over the chasing group which included some of the Tour's General Classification contenders despite the head wind, being frantically encouraged by his team manager, Marc Madiot. He crossed the line alone with an advantage of 26 seconds over the chasers. Despite being the youngest rider of the Tour, he managed to finish 10th overall in the general classification. At 22 years and 54 days, he became the youngest rider to finish in the top 10 since Raymond Impanis in 1947, who was then 21 years and 8 months old.
At the 2013 Tour de France, Pinot abandoned the race on stage 16. He rebounded from this disappointment to finish seventh overall in the Vuelta a España. In the 2014 Tour de France, Pinot won the white jersey for being the best young rider and finished in third place overall. He and Jean-Christophe Péraud became the first Frenchmen to make the podium of the Tour de France since 1997.
In 2015, Pinot had his first victory of the season at the Tour de Romandie. He won the queen stage of the race with seven seconds of an advantage over his nearest pursuer, Ilnur Zakarin of Team Katusha. He finished fourth in the general classification and was awarded the best Young rider jersey. In June, as he was preparing for the 2015 Tour de France, he participated to the Tour de Suisse and won the queen stage, a long and difficult event featuring a mountaintop finish. He won solo at the foot of the Rettenbach glacier. In the Tour de France, Pinot finished 16th in the overall classification, but won Stage 20 at the Alpe d'Huez in solo fashion.
On 15 July 2016, Pinot withdrew from the 2016 Tour de France just before the start of Stage 13 because he was suffering from bronchitis. He had worn the polka dot jersey for 3 stages (Stages 10, 11 and 12) during that Tour.
WD = Withdrew; IP = In Progress
