Meguro (目黒区, Meguro-ku) is a special ward in Tokyo, Japan. The English translation of its Japanese self-designation is Meguro City. The ward was founded on March 15, 1947.
Meguro is predominantly residential in character, but is also home to light industry, corporate head offices, the Komaba campus of University of Tokyo as well as fifteen foreign embassies and consulates. Residential neighborhoods include, Jiyugaoka, Kakinokizaka, and Nakameguro. As of May 1, 2015, the ward has an estimated population of 277,171 and a population density of 18,890 persons per km2. The total area is 14.67 km2.
The Higashiyama shell mound in the north of the ward contains remains from the paleolithic, Jōmon, Yayoi, and Kofun periods.
The area now known as Meguro was formerly two towns, Meguro proper and Hibusuma, all parts of the former Ebara District of Musashi Province. The two were merged into a Meguro ward for Tokyo City in 1932 and since then the ward has remained with no alterations to its territory.
The name "Meguro," meaning "black eyes", derives from the Meguro Fudō (Black-eyed Fudō-myōō) of Ryūsenji. The Meguro Fudō was one of five Fudō-myōō statues placed at strategic points on the outskirts of Edo in the early seventeenth century by the abbot Tenkai, an advisor to Tokugawa Ieyasu, to provide protection for the new capital of the Tokugawa shogunate. Each statue had eyes of a different color. (Another Tokyo ward, Mejiro is named for the white-eyed Fudō-myōō).
Four other special wards surround Meguro. They are Shibuya (to the northeast), Setagaya (to the west), Ōta (to the south), and Shinagawa (to the southeast).
Meguro ward government is led by the city assembly with 36 elected members with current terms from May 1, 2011 to April 30, 2015. The chairman of the council is Yoshiaki Ito. The mayor is Eiji Aoki, an independent. His term lasts until April 24, 2016.
Meguro local election, 2007
Meguro mayoral election, 2008
Meguro River
Komaba Park, Komaba
Komabano Park, Komaba
Komazawa Olympic Park
Meguro Sky Garden, Ohashi Linear roof garden park spiraling 35 meters above street level covering the junction of two major expressways.
Saigoyama Park, Aobadai
Sugekari Park, Aobadai
Nakameguro Park and Nature Center
Himonya Park, Himonya
Tokyo Metropolitan Museum of Photography
Meguro Museum of Art, Tokyo
Meguro Persimmon Hall, concert and performance arts venue
Meguro Parasitological Museum
Japanese Folk Crafts Museum
Chosenin Temple Contemporary Sculpture Museum
Himonya Catholic Church
St. Michael's Catholic Church (German Language)
Himonya Hachiman Shrine
Ōtori Shrine
Ryūsenji (Meguro Fudo temple)
Yūten-ji Temple
St. Paul's Church, Gohongi (Anglican Church in Japan)
Tokyu Corporation
Tōyoko Line: Naka-Meguro, Yutenji, Gakugei Daigaku, Toritsu Daigaku, Jiyugaoka Stations
Ōimachi Line: Jiyugaoka, Midorigaoka, Ōokayama Stations
Meguro Line: Ōokayama, Senzoku Stations
Den-en-toshi Line: Ikejiri-Ōhashi Station
Keio Corporation Keiō Inokashira Line: Komaba-Todaimae Station
Note: Meguro Station (JR East, Tokyu Meguro Line, Tokyo Metro Namboku Line, Toei Mita Line) is in Shinagawa, not Meguro.
Route 3 (Shuto Expressway) Shibuya radial route (Tanimachi JCT - Yoga)
Central Circular Route C2 Under construction. When complete, this deep level subterranean expressway will connect the Yamate Tunnel as far as the Bayshore Route in Shinagawa
University of Tokyo Komaba Campus
Tokyo Institute of Technology
Note: Tokyo Gakugei University and Tokyo Metropolitan University were formerly in Meguro.
Public elementary and junior high schools are operated by the Meguro City Board of Education. Public high schools are operated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education.
Geijutsu High School
International High School
Komaba High School
Meguro High School
Tokyo Metropolitan University High School
In addition the metropolis operates a consolidated junior and senior high school called Ohsyukan Secondary Education School.
Unilever Japan, head office
Amazon Japan head office
Walt Disney Japan, head office
Books Kinokuniya
Don Quijote discount store chain head office
TopTour Corporation
Makino
LDH (Headquarters for EXILE & other Dance Units)
Yumiko Fujita, actress
Waka Inoue, model, actress
Shigeru Izumiya, folk singer, entertainer
Masako, Crown Princess of Japan
Yukio Sakaguchi, mixed martial arts fighter and professional wrestler
Kazuo Tokumitsu, television presenter
Takuya Kimura, singer and actor in male idol group SMAP
Shizuka Kudo, popular singer and wife of Takuya Kimura
Keisuke Kuwata, singer with Southern All Stars
Nobuyo Ōyama, voices the cartoon character Doraemon
Miyu Uehara, gravure idol, found dead in her Meguro apartment.
Halca & Yucali of the hip-hop duo Halcali
