Dunedin /dəˈniːdᵻn/ is a city in Pinellas County, Florida, United States. The name comes from Dùn Èideann, the Scottish Gaelic name for Edinburgh, the capital of Scotland. The population was 35,321 at the 2010 census.
Dunedin is home to several beaches, including Dunedin Causeway, Honeymoon Island, and Caladesi Island State Park, which is consistently rated among the best beaches in the world. Dunedin is one of the few open waterfront communities from Sarasota to Cedar Key where buildings do not completely obscure the view of the Intracoastal Waterway and the Gulf of Mexico beyond; a 1-mile (1.6 km) stretch of Edgewater Drive (also known as Alternate US 19) south of downtown offers views of St. Joseph Sound, Clearwater Beach, and Caladesi Island. Downtown Clearwater and Clearwater Beach are a 6-mile (10 km) drive south on Edgewater.
The downtown business district is notable for its absence of large commercial signage, corporate franchise restaurants or chain retail stores. The Pinellas Trail, a 39-mile-long (63 km) bicycle and pedestrian trail that traverses all of Pinellas County, bisects downtown Dunedin. A large portion of the trail lies on the former roadbed of the Orange Belt Railway, the first railroad in Pinellas County, which arrived in 1888.
Since 1977, Dunedin is the spring training home of the Toronto Blue Jays, as well as the class-A Dunedin Blue Jays of the Florida State League. Dunedin is one of the smallest communities used by Major League spring training teams, although surrounded by a large metropolitan area. Florida Auto Exchange Stadium is situated next to the Dunedin Public Library a few blocks south of downtown on Douglas Avenue, and is just two blocks east of Edgewater Drive. The stadium was built as a replacement to Grant Field, the Blue Jays' first spring training ball park. The library was founded in 1895 and is the oldest public library in Pinellas County.
Until early 2005, Dunedin was the home of Nielsen Media Research's production operations. The city is home to multiple breweries including Dunedin Brewery, Florida's oldest microbrewery.
Dunedin is located at 28°01′31″N 82°46′31″W, which is the approximate geographic center of the city. The middle of downtown (intersection of Main Street and Douglas Avenue) is located at 28°00′42″N 82°47′16″W.
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 28.2 square miles (73 km2). 10.4 square miles (27 km2) of it is land and 17.8 square miles (46 km2) of it (63.20%) is water.
Dunedin is bordered by the city of Clearwater to the south and east, the Gulf of Mexico to the west, and by Palm Harbor (an unincorporated community of Pinellas County) to the north.
As of the census of 2000, there were 35,691 people, 17,258 households, and 9,543 families residing in the city. The population density was 3,438.1 inhabitants per square mile (1,327.6/km²). There were 19,952 housing units at an average density of 1,922.0 per square mile (742.1/km²). The racial makeup of the city was 94.88% White, 2.00% African American, 0.22% Native American, 1.11% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.64% from other races, and 1.11% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.34% of the population.
There were 17,258 households out of which 18.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 43.9% were married couples living together, 8.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 44.7% were non-families. 37.9% of all households were made up of individuals and 20.6% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.01 and the average family size was 2.63.
In the city the population was spread out with 15.6% under the age of 18, 5.4% from 18 to 24, 24.5% from 25 to 44, 24.6% from 45 to 64, and 29.9% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 48 years. For every 100 females there were 84.4 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 81.3 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $34,813, and the median income for a family was $47,620. Males had a median income of $31,876 versus $27,072 for females. The per capita income for the city was $23,460. About 4.8% of families and 8.2% of the population were below the poverty line, including 8.8% of those under age 18 and 7.5% of those age 65 or over.
Pinellas County Schools operates the public school system.
Within the city limits of Dunedin, there are four public elementary schools (Curtis Fundamental, Dunedin, Garrison-Jones, San Jose), one public middle school (Dunedin Highland), and one public high school (Dunedin High School). There are two charter schools (Athenian Academy of Pinellas and Academie DaVinci), two private schools (Anchor Academy and Dunedin Academy) and one Catholic school, Our Lady of Lourdes.
Until July 2006, Dunedin was the home of the main campus of Schiller International University. The university main campus is now in Largo.
86.6% of the city's 36,000 have a high school Diploma, 22.4% bachelor's degree or higher, 7.1% graduate degree.
Dunedin previously hosted an office of Nielsen Media Research. In 2003 the company consolidated its employees in a new complex in Oldsmar, Florida, with workers from Dunedin and other areas in Pinellas County moving into the Oldsmar building.
Scottish families originally settled Dunedin in the nineteenth century. John W. Marston, one of the earliest settlers, was a skilled carpenter and citrus farmer who provided work for many who came to the area. Two Scotsmen, J.O. Douglas and James Sumerville, named the settlement Dunedin, the original name of Edinburgh, their hometown in Scotland. Dunedin has the distinction of being the oldest town south of Cedar Key, Florida. With a dock built to accommodate larger sailing vessels, Dunedin became one of Florida's chief seaport and trading centers and at one time it had the largest fleet of sailing vessels in the state.
Dunedin became incorporated as a town in 1899 in part as a response to numerous complaints about pigs running rampant in the settlement, leading to a still-standing ban on livestock within city limits. By 1913, the town had a population of only 350. It became incorporated as the City of Dunedin in 1925.
During and shortly before World War II the Food Machinery Corporation factory in Dunedin (now demolished) was the primary site for the production of the Landing Vehicle Tracked developed by FMC Dunedin's Engineers and Donald Roebling of Clearwater from Roebling's own Alligator.
Initial training on the LVTs was done at the FMC factory under the auspices of the first Amphibian Tractor School, led by Major William W. Davies. Until barracks and maintenance facilities were completed, the school and its students were housed in the Hotel Dunedin. After training, the Marines from the first Amphibian Tractor School were sent to flesh out the 1st Amphibian Tractor Battalion, which has served with distinction since. In mid-1944, the Marine unit in Dunedin was transferred to Camp Pendleton, California.
Located on Edgewater Drive, the Fenway Hotel is a historic Jazz Age hotel that saw many famous guests throughout its lifetime.
Sister city to Stirling, Scotland, Dunedin has maintained and embraced its Scottish roots. Once a year, Scottish clans descend upon the city for the Dunedin Highland Games. Both Dunedin High School and Dunedin Highland Middle School have competition-level pipe and drum bands. The high school's marching band is known as the Scottish Highlander Band, and both teen and adult members make up the City of Dunedin Pipe and Drum Corps.
In addition to the Highland Games, Dunedin hosts many other annual festivals. The most popular among these is Dunedin's Mardi Gras celebration, during which thousands of visitors descend on the small town.
Boy Scouts Troop 422 - Chartered by Our Lady of Lourdes
Cub Scouts Pack 422 - Chartered by Our Lady of Lourdes
Cub Scouts Pack 10 - Chartered by First Presbyterian Church of Dunedin
The City of Dunedin currently operates under a nonpartisan commissioner-manager form of government. The commission comprises four commissioners and a mayor, who are elected by the registered voters under a staggered system.
The chief executive officer, known as the City Manager, oversees the ten departments and the annual budget.
Currently, the Dunedin City Commission is made up of Mayor Julie Ward Bujalski, Vice-Mayor Heather Gracy, Commissioner John Tornga, Commissioner Deborah Kynes, and Commissioner Bruce Livingston. The interim City Manager is Douglas Hutchens.
The city government is made up of ten departments with various divisions and sections. The departments are Administration, Human Resources, Information Services, Public Works, Parks & Recreation, Fire, Library, Community Services, Economical Development, Planning/Development and Finance. The Community Redevelopment Agency (CRA) oversees downtown projects and the needs of downtown Dunedin merchants and tourism.
Dunedin boasts an extensive Volunteer Services section, and enables all citizens the chance to have their opinions expressed and tended to. Currently, there are 39 boards and committees that serve as advisory groups to the City Manager and the City Commission.
The city of Dunedin contains a Parks & Recreation Department, which provides low-cost recreation programming to the city's residents. The city operates four recreation facilities, each one designed to provide resources for a specific age group.
The Dunedin Fine Art Center (DFAC), opened in 1975 has grown to be one of the most renowned centers for visual art instruction and exhibition in the southeastern United States. At nearly 40,000 sq. ft., DFAC houses 5 galleries, 15 studio classrooms, the Gallery Gift Shop, the Palm Cafe and the DLM Children's ART Museum. Tampa Bay Times writer Lennie Bennett says that DFAC is “the artistic equivalent of a village square,” offering quality experiences to people of all ages.
In 2007, Dunedin opened its newest and largest recreation facility, the Dunedin Community Center, at a cost of just over $10 million, mostly paid for by the "Penny for Pinellas" tax. Other recreation facilities include the Martin Luther King, Jr. Recreation Center, the Hale Activity Center, Dunedin Nature Center, and the Highlander Pool Complex.
The Dunedin Country Club golf course is semi-private. There are memberships available and the course is open to the public. The course was deeded to the city of Dunedin for recreational purposes in 1930 by the Contract Investment Company.
The city has a large athletic base, with community soccer, baseball, hockey, and softball teams. Dunedin reflected the Gaelic origins of its name by playing host to a short lived American shinty club, Dunedin Camanachd, in the mid-2000s.
The city-owned Dunedin Marina has 194 boat slips and is one of the finest municipal marinas on the West Coast of Florida. The marina is located on the intercoastal waterway between Dunedin Causeway and Clearwater Causeways. It is home to the Dunedin Boat Club, one of Florida’s oldest Sailing Clubs.  
The Dunedin Public Library has two branches, the Dunedin Main Library (located at 223 Douglas Ave) and the Friends Branch Library (located at 1920 Pinehurst Rd, which opened in 2007). As part of their offerings and services, the Dunedin Public Library offers monthly delivery service to homebound residents of Dunedin. Other unique offerings include a seed library where patrons can check out seeds for gardening, a knitting and crocheting group, and genealogy assistance. The Dunedin Public Library initiated a Little Free Library movement in Pinellas County. There are currently thirteen Little Free Libraries within Dunedin. The Literacy Council of Upper Pinellas, Inc., which promotes adult literacy in North Pinellas County, serves the Dunedin Public Library.
Dunedin is popular with tourists and includes numerous shops, bars, dinining options and night life. A Downtown Market is held regularly as well as special events and a 2nd Friday Art Walk.  
Clayton Andrews, MLB pitcher for the Toronto Blue Jays
Sean Burnett, MLB relief pitcher for the Washington Nationals
Mike "Pinball" Clemons, player and coach of the CFL's Toronto Argonauts; born and raised in Dunedin, and graduated from Dunedin High School
Sylvia Earle, oceanographic explorer and marine biologist
John G. Hanna, sailboat designer, designed the Tahiti ketch
Jim Hendry, executive for the New York Yankees, former GM of the Chicago Cubs
Doron Jensen, restaurateur and co-founder of Homestyle Buffet
Kidd Kraddick, radio host of Kidd Kraddick in the Morning
George Lowe, TV actor
Daniel Norris, MLB pitcher for the Detroit Tigers
David Nutter, popular writer for television's The X-Files; graduate of Dunedin High School
Donnie Scott, MLB catcher for the Texas Rangers, Seattle Mariners and Cincinnati Reds
Frank Sprogell, professional golfer and golf course architect
Lari White, country singer
Bobby Wilson, MLB catcher for the Tampa Bay Rays
