A spa town (also called a bathing-place or simply a spa) is a specialized resort town situated around a mineral spa (a developed mineral spring). Patrons visited spas to "take the waters" for their purported health benefits. The word comes from the Belgian town of Spa.
Thomas Guidott set up practice in the English town of Bath, Somerset in 1668. He became interested in the curative properties of the waters and wrote A discourse of Bathe, and the hot waters there. Also, Some Enquiries into the Nature of the water in 1676. This brought the health-giving properties of the hot mineral waters to the attention of the aristocracy, who started to partake in them soon after.
The term spa is used for towns or resorts offering hydrotherapy, which can include cold water or mineral water treatments and hot thermal baths.
Termas de Rio Hondo
Most of the mineral springs in Australia are in the Central Highlands of Victoria, although there are a few springs in South Australia, Moree, New South Wales and Queensland. Most are within 30 km of Daylesford, Victoria: the Daylesford and Hepburn Springs call themselves the 'Spa Centre of Australia'.
Chaudfontaine (whose name literally means "hot fountain" in French)
Ostend
Spa
See: List of spa towns in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Banja Vrućica, Teslić
Brazil has a growing number of spa towns. The traditional ones are: Águas de Lindoia, Serra Negra, Águas de São Pedro, Caxambu, Poços de Caldas, Caldas Novas, Araxá, and São Lourenço.
See: List of spa towns in Bulgaria
Bulgaria is known for its more than 500 mineral springs, including the hottest spring in the Balkans at Sapareva Banya - 103 °C. Other famous spa towns include Sandanski, Hisarya, Bankya, Devin, Kyustendil, Varshets, Velingard.
In Bulgarian, the word for a spa is баня (transliterated banya).
See: List of spa towns in Canada
Harrison Hot Springs is one of the oldest among 18 in British Columbia; there are also two in Alberta and one in Ontario.
See: List of spa towns in Croatia
In Croatia, the word Toplice implies a spa town. The most famous spa towns in Croatia are Daruvar, Šibenik and Sisak.
See: Spa towns in the Czech Republic
In the Czech Language, the word Lázně implies a spa town. The most famous spa towns in Czech Republic are Karlovy Vary, Teplice, Františkovy Lázně and Mariánské Lázně.
See: List of spa towns in France
In France, the words bains, thermes, and eaux in city names often imply a spa town. There are more than 50 spa towns in France, including Vichy, Aix-les-Bains, Bagnoles-de-l'Orne, Dax, and Enghien-les-Bains.
See: List of spa towns in Germany
In Germany, the word Bad implies a spa town. Among the many famous spa towns in Germany are Bad Aachen, Baden-Baden, Bad Brückenau, Bad Ems, Bad Homburg, Bad Honnef, Bad Kissingen, Bad Kreuznach, Bad Mergentheim, Bad Muskau, Bad Pyrmont, Bad Reichenhall, Bad Saarow, Bad Schandau, Bad Segeberg, Bad Soden, Bad Tölz, Bad Wildbad, Bad Wildstein, Berchtesgaden, Binz, Freudenstadt, Heiligendamm, Heringsdorf, Kampen, Königstein, Radebeul, Schwangau, St. Blasien, Titisee, Tegernsee, Travemünde and Zingst. Wiesbaden is the largest spa town in Germany.
See: List of spa towns in Hungary
In Hungary, the word fürdő or the more archaic füred ("bath"), fürdőváros ("spa town") or fürdőhely ("bathing place") implies a spa town. Hungary is rich in thermal waters with health benefits, and many spa towns are popular tourist destinations. Budapest has several spas, including Turkish style spas dating back to the 16th century. Eger also has a Turkish spa. Other famous spas include the ones at Hévíz, Harkány, Bük, Hajdúszoboszló, Gyula, Bogács, Bükkszék, Zalakaros, the Cave Bath at Miskolctapolca and the Zsóry-fürdő at Mezőkövesd.
See: List of spa towns in Italy
In Italy, spa towns, called città termale (from Latin thermae), are very numerous all over the country because of the intense geological activity of the territory. These places were known and used since the Roman age.
Mondorf-les-Bains
Valkenburg near Maastricht, which wants to be a "city of wellness".
Most spa towns in Poland are located in the Lesser Poland and Lower Silesian Voivodeships.
See: List of spa towns in Poland
Portugal is well known by famous spa towns throughout of the country.
Due to its high quality, as well as the landscape where are located, the most important ones are:
Caldas da Rainha
Caldas das Taipas
Caldas de Monchique
Caldas de Vizela
Pedras Salgadas
Vidago
Chaves
Caldas da Felgueira located in Viseu District, and 5km from Nelas town.
See: List of spa towns in Romania
In Romania, the word Băile implies a spa town. The most famous spa towns in Romania are Băile Herculane, Băile Felix, Mangalia, Covasna, Călimănești & Borsec.
See: List of spa towns in Serbia
Serbia is known for its many spa cities. Some of the best known springs are the Vrnjačka Banja, Bukovička Banja, Vrujci and Niška Banja. The hottest spring in Serbia is at Vranjska Banja (96°C)
In Serbia, the word Banja implies a spa town.
See: Spa towns in Slovakia
Slovakia is well known by its spa towns. The most famous is Piešťany. The most important spa towns in Slovakia are:
Bardejovské Kúpele
Dudince
Liptovský Ján
Lúčky
Piešťany
Rajecké Teplice
Kúpele Sliač
Smrdáky
Trenčianske Teplice
Turčianske Teplice
Thermal Park Vrbov
Spa towns in Slovenia include Rogaška Slatina, Radenci, Čatež ob Savi, Dobrna, and Moravske Toplice. They offer accommodation in hotels, apartments, bungalows, and camp sites. The Slovenian words terme or toplice imply a spa town.
Baden
Bad Ragaz (Ragatz, also known as "Old Baths Pfäfers" or "Old Baths of Pfäfersin)
Davos
Lavey-les-Bains
Leukerbad
Schinznach Bad
Yverdon-les-Bains
Zurzach
Ragatz
Rotorua
Hanmer Springs
Some but not all UK spa towns contain "Spa", "Wells", or "Bath" in their names, e.g., Matlock Bath. Some towns are designated Spa Heritage Towns. Two out of three of the English towns granted the title "Royal", Royal Leamington Spa and Royal Tunbridge Wells, are spa towns.
Chena Hot Springs, Alaska
Hot Springs, Arkansas
Desert Hot Springs, California
Palm Springs, California
Pagosa Springs, Colorado
Warm Springs, Georgia
West Baden Springs, Indiana
Mount Clemens, Michigan
Jemez Springs, New Mexico
Truth or Consequences, New Mexico
Ballston Spa, New York
Saratoga Springs, New York
Hot Springs, North Carolina
Hot Springs, South Dakota
Mineral Wells, Texas
Warm Springs, Virginia
Bath (Berkeley Springs), West Virginia
Waukesha, Wisconsin
See: List of spa towns
in the Arab world - Hammam
in Australia
in Belgium -
in Bulgaria - Bani
in Chile - Termas
in Croatia - Toplice
in Cyprus - Loutra-Therma
in the Czech Republic - Lázně
in Ethiopia - Filwoha
in France - Bains, thermes
in Georgia -
in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland - Bad, the first part of the names of most spa towns, a cognate to the English "bath" while "Therme" is used for the spa itself.
in Greece - Loutra-Therma
in Hungary - fürdő or -füred
in Italy - Terme
in Iran - "Cheshme Ab-e-Garm" or "Cheshme Ab-e-Madani"
in Jamaica -
in Japan - Onsen
in Korea - 온천 or 사우나
in Lithuania - Druskininkai
in Malaysia - Poring
in Mexico- Termas or Balneario
in New Zealand - Rotorua
in Peru - Cuzco, Cajamarca
in Poland - Krynica-Zdrój
in Portugal - Caldas or Termas
in Russia - Минеральные воды or Лечебные воды
in Romania - Băile
in Slovakia - Liečebné kúpele
in Serbia - Banja
in Spain - Termas or Balneario
in Turkey - Termal or Kaplica
in Ukraine
Bukovička Banja
Spa
Resort architecture
Spa architecture
Spa resort
Hot spring
Sauna
Thermae
Mineral water
Hydrotherapy
Sanatorium
