Cádiz is a province of southern Spain, in the southwestern part of the autonomous community of Andalusia. It is the southernmost part of mainland Spain, as well as the southernmost part of continental Europe.
It is bordered by the Spanish provinces of Huelva, Seville, and Málaga, as well as the Atlantic Ocean, the Mediterranean Sea, the Strait of Gibraltar and the British overseas territory of Gibraltar. Its area is 7,385 square kilometers.
Its capital is the city of Cádiz, which has a population of more than 128,000. The largest city is Jerez de la Frontera with 208,896 inhabitants (as of 2010), and another important city is Algeciras with just over 114,000 inhabitants. The entire province had a population of 1,240,175 (as of 2014), of whom about 600,000 live in the Bay of Cádiz area. Its population density is 167.93 per square kilometer.
The province encompasses 44 municipalities; besides its capital, other important cities are Jerez and Algeciras. (See the list of municipalities in Cádiz.) According to a roster developed by the Council of Tourism and Sport of Andalusia on 27 March 2003, there are officially six traditional or touristic comarcas (provincial areas or counties) in the Province of Cádiz:
Bahía de Cádiz (Bay of Cádiz)
Campiña de Jerez (Countryside of Jerez)
Campo de Gibraltar (Countryside of Gibraltar)
Bajo Guadalquivir (Lower Guadalquivir, or Northwest Coast, Costa Noroeste)
La Janda
Sierra de Cádiz (Cádiz Mountains)
This area comprises towns and cities on the shores of the Bay of Cádiz on the west-central coast of the province:
Cádiz
Chiclana
El Puerto de Santa María
Puerto Réal
San Fernando
This fertile area only includes two municipalities, both large in area:
Jerez de la Frontera
San José del Valle
The towns that extend into the rural hinterlands north of Gibraltar are:
Algeciras
Jimena de la Frontera
Castellar de la Frontera
San Roque
La Línea de la Concepción
Los Barrios
Tarifa
The towns of this area called the "Bajo Guadalquivir" (lower Guadalquivir valley), are:
Chipiona
Rota
Sanlúcar de Barrameda
Trebujena
Towns included in La Janda, an area in the southwestern part of the province, are:
Alcalá de los Gazules
Barbate
Benalup-Casas Viejas
Conil de la Frontera
Medina Sidonia
Paterna de Rivera
Vejer de la Frontera
Towns included in the Cádiz Mountains area, in the northeastern part of the province, include:
Alcalá del Valle
Algar
Algodonales
Arcos de la Frontera
Benaocaz
Bornos
El Bosque
El Gastor
Espera
Grazalema
Olvera
Prado del Rey
Puerto Serrano
Setenil de las Bodegas
Torre Alháquime
Ubrique
Villaluenga del Rosario
Villamartín
Zahara de la Sierra
The entire province of Cádiz has a mediterranean climate, but with large differences in summer temperatures between the three official stations in Cádiz, Jerez and Tarifa depending on position relative to the coastline. Tarifa is exceptionally cool for such a southerly parallel in Europe, but winter temperatures are mild throughout the province with less difference between localities than in summer. Average yearly rainfall is 521 millimetres (20.5 in) in Cádiz, 573 millimetres (22.6 in) in Jerez and 603 millimetres (23.7 in) in Tarifa. This is comparable to much cloudier climates further north in Europe, in spite of the high number of sunshine hours in the province. The Cádiz region is also much wetter than the arid Almería province further east in Andalusia.
Sherry Vineyards
John Harvey & Sons in Jerez de la Frontera
Gonzalez Byass
Olive groves
Fishing Ports, as in Cádiz and Algeciras.
Cork products from the Alcornocales cork-oak forests
Navantia
Airbus
CASA
Delphi
Ford
Cepsa
Lufthansa CityLine
Endesa
Acerinox
The main industry is tourism, mainly from non-coastal Spanish cities, Germany and the UK.
Its once-important shipbuilding industry (Astilleros) is now in crisis due to competition from South Korea and China.
There are factories of Airbus and Delphi.
It also exports sherry as well as alimentary products.
The province of Cádiz has many kilometers of beaches and (as of 2005) the highest number of Blue Flags of all coastal provinces in Europe.
Some of these beaches are relatively wild and far from big urban areas. One of the attractions of the area is its contrast to the mass tourism on the Mediterranean coast. There are extensive nature reserves in the region and the unspoilt feel of the area is heightened by the presence of wild animals including cows and horses on many stretches of beach.
The Costa de la Luz has traditionally been a popular destination for Spaniards wanting to enjoy the beach while avoiding the stifling heat of the Mediterranean Coast, although until recently this largely unspoilt Atlantic coastline was little known to foreign visitors. One of the factors that brought the region to the attention of foreign holidaymakers was the growing realisation that its Southern reaches are one of the world's best locations for wind sports.
Tarifa, located on the Strait of Gibraltar at the southernmost point of mainland Europe, has become Europe's foremost kitesurfing destination due to the area's unique wind phenomena, reliably sunny summer weather and the variety of beaches at locations such as Los Canos de Meca, Bolonia, Punta Paloma and, most famously, Playa de Los Lances where in the summer months you will often see over 1,000 kites in the air. The local economy has benefited significantly from the wind sport explosion: there are more than 50 kite schools in Tarifa and hundreds of shops, bars and hotels serving the many thousands of kitesurfers who visit every year.
Notable beaches:
Playa La Barrosa in Chiclana de la Frontera
Playa La Victoria in Cádiz
Playa de Levante in El Puerto de Santa María
Playa de Bolonia in Tarifa
Playa de Camposoto in San Fernando
Los Canos de Meca
Playa de Los Lances in Tarifa
Carnival of Cádiz
Feria de Jerez
Semana Santa in all municipalities of the Province
Horse racing in Sanlúcar de Barrameda
Circuito Permanente de Jerez
White Towns of Andalusia
Ruta del Toro
Doñana National Park is one of two national parks in the autonomous community of Andalusia. A small area of the park extends into Cadiz Province, just north of Sanlucar de Barrameda and on the south bank of the Rio Guadalquivir. This area is primarily marismas. The public have access to a recreational area and a short walking trail. There is no direct access to the bulk of the park that lies on the north bank of the river in the provinces of Seville and Huelva.
100 km², located at the mouth of the Guadalete river, consists of marshland, beaches, reed and sand dunes.
Bird watching. Sailing, windsurfing, hiking.
(Ocean) Pine. Many types of shrubs and bushes.
Gannet solan goose, storch, cormorant, great crested grebe, (sea)gull, flamingo, tern, sea eagle, avocet.
37.97 km², high cliff rock formations covered by pine trees.
Bird watching, archaeological and botanical excursions, diving, windsurfing, sailing, hiking.
Strandpine, black juniper tree, black spruce, juniper, small palm tree, rosemary.
Herring gull, chatfinch, greenfinch, cattle egret, little egret, crested tit, woodpecker, kestrel, peregrine falcon.
This natural park is shared by three provinces, Cádiz, Huelva and Seville. It is an area to the east and northeast of the national park.
Home of the Iberian lynx, a protected species.
Information center in Alcalá de los Gazules; visitors centers in Algeciras and Cortes de la Frontera (Málaga).
1,700.25 km² in area.
Low mountain range, densely covered by cork oak trees ("Alcornoques").
Bird watching, archaeological and botanical excursions, hiking, mountainbiking, speleology.
Cork oak, olive tree, gall oak, pink rock rose, small palm tree, alder, rhododendron, holly, bracken (fern), cherry tree, laurel.
Sparrow hawk, short-toed snake eagle, booted eagle, goshawk, eagle owl, tawny owl, culture, kestrel, peregrine falcon, wild boar, deer, weasel, (sea)otter, wildcat, mongoose.
Administration in El Bosque; visitors' center in El Bosque.
516.95 km² in area.
Limestone formation, transformed to ravines, declines and caves. Large colonies of Spanish fir ("pinsapo").
Bird watching, archaeological and botanical excursions.
Hiking, climbing, mountainbiking, speleology, paragliding.
Spanish fir, cork oak, holm oak, gall oak, carob, oleaster.
Imperial eagle, golden eagle, fish hawk, vulture, Egyptian vulture, mountain goat, deer, mongoose, (sea)otter, fox.
Is the most meridional national park of Europe.
Its location at the southernmost point of mainland Spain, and of mainland Europe, at the point where the Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea meet in the Strait of Gibraltar, places it on the migratory route for many birds.
There are eight natural reserves in the province: Complejo Endorreico de Chiclana, Complejo Endorreico de Espera, Complejo Endorreico de Puerto Real, Complejo Endorreico del Puerto de Santa María, Laguna de Medina, Lagunas de las Canteras y el Tejón, Laguna de la Paja, and Peñón de Zaframagón (which straddles the border with the province of Seville.)
There are seven natural sites in the province: Cola del Embalse de Arcos, Cola del Embalse de Bornos, Estuario del Río Guadiaro, Isla del Trocadero, Marismas de Sancti Petri, Marismas del Río Palmones, and Playa de Los Lances.
Parques Periurbanos: Pinares y Dunas de San Antón La Suara La Barrosa
There are five natural monuments in the province: Corrales de Rota, Duna de Bolonia, Punta del Boquerón, Tómbolo de Trafalgar, and Escarpes del Río Trejo en Setenil.
Autovía A-4
Autovía A-7
Autovía A-381
N-340
Autovía A-48
Jerez Airport
Cádiz-Seville Line
Cercanías Cádiz
Algeciras-Granada Line
Port of Algeciras
Port of Cádiz
The main ways to enter the province are by road from Seville or Malaga and by the Jerez Airport.
Football
Xerez CD in the Segunda División.
Cádiz CF in the Segunda División B.
Racing Club Portuense in the Segunda División B.
Algeciras CF in the Tercera División.
CD San Fernando in the Segunda División B.
Real Balompédica Linense in the Segunda División B.
Rugby Union
CR Atlético Portuense in the División de Honor B de Rugby.
List of Bienes de Interés Cultural in Cádiz
