Delta is a district municipality in British Columbia, and forms part of Greater Vancouver. Located south of Richmond, it is bordered by the Fraser River to the north, the United States (Point Roberts, Washington) to the south and the city of Surrey to the east. Delta is composed of three distinct communities: Ladner, Tsawwassen, and North Delta.
Prior to European settlement, Delta's flatlands and coastal shores were inhabited by the Tsawwassen indigenous peoples, of the Coast Salish First Nations. The land was first sighted by Europeans in 1791, when Spanish explorer Lieutenant Francisco de Eliza mistook the area for an island and named it "Isla Capeda". The first European settler in Delta was James Kennedy who pre-empted 135 acres in what later became Annieville in February 1860. Thomas and William Ladner, began farming the area named after them in 1868. Farming and fishing helped the community grow quickly over the next few decades. In 1879, the area was incorporated to become "Delta", and the village of Ladner was made as its administrative centre.
Due to its geography, Delta was a relatively isolated community. The completion of the George Massey Tunnel in 1959 linking Ladner to Richmond and Vancouver along with the opening, in 1960, of the Tsawwassen Ferry Terminal and the Highway 99 being rerouted from the King George Highway in Surrey in 1962 to a new route through Delta, ended Delta's isolation and resulted in a massive 400% population growth over the next 20 years. The 1986 completion of the Alex Fraser Bridge connecting North Delta to New Westminster and Vancouver also helped Delta's growth.
As of 2005, Delta's population was 102,655. About 23% of Delta's population are visible minorities, of which there are approximately 12,000 South Asians and 5,400 Chinese Canadians. There are also about 1,400 Aboriginal peoples, some from Tsawwassen First Nation, who still hold a fraction of their former traditional territories on the Tsawwassen First Nation at the mouth of the Fraser River, which are shared with the Hwlitsum First Nation from the Gulf Islands
Delta comprises three distinct, geographically separate communities:
North Delta (pop: 51,623) is home to over half of Delta's population. It is a largely suburban area in north-east Delta bordered by the Burns Bog and Surrey.
Ladner (pop: 21,112) is a 19th-century fishing village in north-west Delta that has expanded into a suburb. Fishing and farming are important industries. Ladner Trunk Road is its main street.
Tsawwassen (pop: 20,933) is a suburban community in south-west Delta that calls itself the sunniest place in Metro Vancouver. Luxury waterfront homes line Tsawwassen's coast. Tsawwassen is also home to the busy Tsawwassen Ferry Terminal which links the mainland to Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands. Tsawwassen, together with Ladner are also known as South Delta.
According to the 2011 Canadian Census, the population of Delta is 99,863, a 3.3% increase from 2006. The population density is 554.4 people per square km. The median age is 42.8 years old, which is a bit higher than the national median age at 40.6 years old. There are 35,781 private dwellings with an occupancy rate of 97.1%. According to the 2011 National Household Survey, the median value of a dwelling in Delta is $562,181 which is significantly higher than the national average at $280,552. The median household income (after-taxes) in Delta is $71,590, quite higher than the national average at $54,089.
Delta is a fairly diverse city. The racial make up of Delta is:
67.5% White
17.2% South Asian; 15.6% Indian
7.2% East Asian; 5.7% Chinese, 0.4% Korean, 1.0% Japanese
3.2% Southeast Asian; 2.7% Filipino
2.3% Aboriginal; 1.3% First Nations, 0.9% Metis
0.7% Latin American
0.5% Black
0.1% West Asian
0.1% Arab
0.7% Multiracial; 1.6% including Metis
0.3% Other
Most of Delta is either Christian (44.9%), or affiliates with no religion (37.1%), but there is also large Sikh (10.6%), Hindu (3.0%), Muslim (2.0%) and Buddhist (1.3%) communities. The remaining 1.1% affiliate with another religion.
Delta is located 27 kilometres (17 mi) south of Vancouver and 22 kilometres (14 mi) north of the U.S. border at Peace Arch, Surrey. It is bordered by water on three sides: The Fraser River to the north, the Georgia Strait to the west and Boundary Bay to the south.
At 364 square kilometres (141 sq mi), Delta is the largest municipality in the GVRD; the second largest is its neighbour to the east, Surrey, at 317.4 square kilometres (122.5 sq mi).
Delta's flat, fertile land has made it one of the most important agricultural areas in Greater Vancouver. The Agricultural Land Reserve regulations preserve most of this land for agricultural use, preventing its conversion to suburban housing. North Delta is also home to the Burns Bog, 40 square kilometres (10,000 acres) of natural wetlands that are important for wildlife.
Delta is governed by the Delta Municipal Council, led by a Mayor and six Councillors, elected for four-year terms, and there is also an elected school board. The current mayor is Lois Jackson. Unlike most communities in Canada, but like Vancouver and Richmond, Delta has a system of locally based election slates such as TriDelta, IDEA, One Delta, Delta Residents Association, Delta Connect and DIVA.
In the 2013 Provincial election, the North Delta seat went to Scott Hamilton of the British Columbia Liberal Party while the South Delta seat went to independent Vicki Huntington.
In the House of Commons of Canada, Delta is represented by the Delta electoral district. As of the 2015 elections, Delta's MP seat is held by Carla Qualtrough of the Liberal Party.
Delta, unlike most Lower Mainland municipalities, has its own police department.
In Delta is the Arnott Substation (ARN), the mainland terminal of the HVDC Vancouver Island circuit.
Public transportation in Delta is provided by the South Coast British Columbia Transportation Authority bus system. There is no rapid transit system in Delta, though the SkyTrain system in Surrey comes within three kilometres of the city's borders.
Delta is a major transportation hub for the Lower Mainland. Most vehicles leaving Vancouver for the United States pass through Delta's borders. Many vehicles destined for Vancouver Island use the Tsawwassen ferry terminal in Delta.
Highway 99 links Richmond to Delta via the George Massey Tunnel, built in 1959. North Delta is linked to New Westminster and Richmond by Highway 91 and the massive Alex Fraser Bridge (opened in 1986). Delta is linked to Surrey, Langley, and all points eastward by Highway 10.
Highway 17 in Delta provides a connection to the Tsawwassen B.C. Ferry terminal, which provides car ferry connections to Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands. In December 2013, north of the current junction with Deltaport Way, Highway 17 will be rerouted upon completion of the "South Fraser Perimeter Road", and will primarily run parallel to River Road through Tilbury and North Delta to all points east. The remaining stretch of Highway 17 north of that point will be renamed Highway 17A.
River Road is also another connector through the municipality. River Road starts in Surrey and heads westbound through North Delta, under the Alex Fraser Bridge, north of Burns Bog, and then terminates at 62B Street, which then turns into Highway 17A.
Like River Road, the western communities of "South Delta" (Ladner and Tsawwassen) are linked to North Delta and communities to the east by Ladner Trunk Road; east of its crossover of Highway 91, the road becomes Highway 10.
56th Street is another major artery in the community, bisecting the Tsawwassen region; it is the only road leading into the community of Point Roberts, south of the Canadian/American border.
Delta is also home to Boundary Bay Airport, Canada's 7th busiest airport by aircraft movements. Boundary Bay Airport is primarily used for private aircraft, commercial charters, and flying lessons.
Delta is the westernmost community served by Fraser Health Authority which operates Delta Hospital in Ladner and also funds home and community care.
The Delta Hospice Society operates a facility near to the hospital.
Delta Public Schools operates Anglophone public schools in the city.
The Conseil scolaire francophone de la Colombie-Britannique operates one Francophone primary school in that city: école du Bois-joli.
Delta has many minor sports teams in ice hockey, soccer, football, field hockey, baseball, field lacrosse and box lacrosse. Over 160 young people play ringette in Delta. The Delta Ringette Association has 13 teams in 2005. Notable professional sports players from Delta are Jeff Francis (MLB), Justin Morneau (MLB), Brent Seabrook (NHL), Troy Brouwer (NHL) and Mitch Berger (NFL).
Delta's unique and varying terrain provides a challenging test for many of the world's best cyclists in the Tour de Delta. Since its first event in 2001, the Tour de Delta has grown to be Canada's largest cycling event, held annually in July as part of BC Superweek.
The Delta Triathlon is also a very popular event, selling out each year in April. The event takes place in Ladner from the Ladner Leisure Centre. Over 500 participants take part, including many from the local South Delta Triathlon Club.
Vince Abbott, former professional American football player; kicker for the San Diego Chargers (1987–1988)
Dylan Ainsworth, CFL player
Mitch Berger, former professional American football player; punter for eight National Football League teams
Adam Braidwood, professional Canadian football player; defensive end for the Edmonton Eskimos
Troy Brouwer, professional hockey player; forward for the Washington Capitals
Tyler Connolly, Musician, Singer, Songwriter, Guitarist; vocalist and guitarist for the rock band, Theory of a Deadman
John Cummins, Canadian politician; Formerly the Conservative Member of Parliament for the riding of Delta—Richmond East, Former leader of the BC Conservative Party
Martin Cummins, Canadian actor
Kevin Eiben, professional Canadian football player; linebacker for the Toronto Argonauts
Jeff Francis, professional baseball player; starting pitcher for the Colorado Rockies
Michael Lee, Canadian field hockey player
Brandon McMillan, professional hockey player; Left wing/centre for the Vancouver Canucks
Tyson Mulock, professional hockey player; centre for the Berlin Polar Bears of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga
Gary Nylund, former professional hockey player; defenceman for the Toronto Maple Leafs, Chicago Blackhawks, and New York Islanders
Kyle O'Reilly, professional wrestler
Jason Priestley, Canadian actor and director
Dave Randorf, Canadian sportscaster, currently works for Rogers Sportsnet
Byron Ritchie, professional hockey player; formerly in the NHL, currently centre for SC Bern of the Swiss National League A
Mark Rogers, former professional soccer player, Men's National Team Assistant Coach
Davis Sanchez, professional Canadian football player; cornerback for the BC Lions
Will Sasso, Canadian comedian and actor
Brent Seabrook, professional hockey player; defenceman for the Chicago Blackhawks
Rob Short, Canadian field hockey player
Adam Wallace professional soccer player
Marie Warder, writer and founder of the Canadian Hemochromatosis Society
Brendan Gallagher, professional hockey player; forward for the Montreal Canadiens
 Mangalore, India, 2010
