The Premier Soccer League (PSL) is a national sports association responsible for administering the two professional football leagues in South Africa - the South African Premier Division and National First Division.
The PSL was created following an agreement between the National Soccer League and the remnants of the National Premier Soccer League (NPSL).
The company acts as a governing body and competition organiser. The PSL are affiliated to the South African Football Association but SAFA do not govern the PSL competitions. The National First Division (NFD) is the second-highest league of South African club soccer. Teams that are relegated from the PSL organised divisions compete in the SAFA Second Division.
The Premier Soccer League sell the naming rights of their competitions to a title sponsor. The PSL organise the following competitions:
League competitions
South African Premier Division / PSL
National First Division / NFD
Cup competitions
Nedbank Cup
Telkom Knockout Cup
MTN 8
They had previously organised Charity Cup, a one-day, four team, season opening cup, which ran from 1986 to 2010. The Baymed Cup was open to First Division sides, but the competition was terminated after one edition in 2006.
Licenses to participate in the league can be bought and sold on the free market. In August 2002, the PSL bought two Premier Division licences, from the owners of Ria Stars F.C. and Free State Stars F.C., the PSL dissolved the license to ease fixture congestion and reduce their own costs by 400k ZAR per month as each top tier club received 200k ZAR on a monthly basis from the PSL. The two clubs were purchased for 8 million ZAR. The two clubs had differing fates, Ria Stars never appeared again whilst Free State Stars bought the league license from Maholosiane F.C., a team participating in the National First Division in the 2002-03 season and earned promotion to the top tier in the 2003-04 season.
The NSL is the only special member of the South African Football Association (SAFA). The NSL has 32 members, the 16 clubs from the Premier Division and 16 clubs from the first division who together form the Board of governors. The Board of governors is the supreme body and its functions are stated in Article 13 of the NSL constitution. The Board of governors elects the Chairman and the Executive committee, it is empowered to delegate management and operational functions to the Executive Committee. The Executive committee consists of 8 elected members and the Chief Executive Officer. The Executive is appointed for a period of four years at the quadrennial general meeting. The Executive delegates some of its operational functions to the CEO.
