Sabzevar  pronunciation  (Persian: سبزوار‎‎) is a city in, and the capital of Sabzevar County, in Razavi Khorasan Province in northeastern Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 208,172, in 57,024 families.
It is approximately 220 kilometres west of Mashhad, the provincial capital. In ancient times it was called Beihagh (Beyhaq).
Sabzevar is the commercial center for an agricultural region producing grapes and raisins. There is some small-scale industry, for food processing, copperware and electric motors. Through the old bazaar of Sabzevar fresh, dried, and preserved fruits and vegetables are exported. Sabzevar is connected to Tehran and Mashhad by road. Sabzevar Airport provides domestic flights.
The history of Sabzevar goes back to the 1st millennium BC. Ancient remains include fire-temple 'Azarbarzin' which is still visible.
After the Mongol invasion of Iran, the city was the first part of Iran that moved towards its freedom, under the lead of the Sarbedaran movement.
In 14th century Timur invaded Iran, and despite the brave defence of Sabzevar's population, he destroyed the city quite completely. Contemporary sources mentions 90,000 people having been murdered by Timur. After killing all men in the town, he cut their heads and made 3 pyramids of the heads, in what is now the modern Sarberiz (meaning "Place of heads") square.
Sabzevar Province had been lost by the Safavids to the Uzbeks of Transoxiana, but was regained following a Safavid counter-offensive around 1600, along with Herat and Farah.[4]
Sabzevar is located between Nishapur from east, Esfarayen from north, Shahrood from west and Bardaskan from south in Razavi khorasan province.
Mil-e Khosrow Gerd (meaning "The brick tower of king Khosrau) is the highest brick tower in the city. Mosques include the Masjed Jameh of Friday mosque, with its two tall minarets. They were both built during the Islamic age of Sabzevar.
Sabzevar University of Medical Sciences is one of the most prestigious universities in Khorasan province. MEDSAB is the oldest institution of higher education in Sabzevar city, established in 1975. MEDSAB offers 20 programs to more than 1200 students. This university has more than 100 faculty members. MEDSAB is known for rapid promotion in education quality and programs, and the MEDSAB faculty is composed of men and women. Faculty members are passionate and curious individuals who continue their own research while teaching at MEDSAB. They come from across the country and all over the world, bringing with them a diverse wealth of knowledge. MEDAB is known for combining medical sciences and bioengineering. There are 6 hospitals and 4 schools in this university.
The city is home to the Islamic Azad University of Sabzevar (IAUS), founded in 1985 in response to increasing demands for a higher education center in the region; expansion and development have always continued within the university. Currently there are about 6,500 students studying in three campuses.
Sabzevar has also another university located in the north part of the city, Hakim Sabzevari University that was established in 1987. HSU offers 120 bachelors, masters, and Ph.D. programs to more than 7,200 male and female students studying under about 160 faculty members.
Abul-Fazl Bayhaqi
Al-Bayhaqi
Ali Divandari
Ali Shariati
Hadi Sabzavari
Mahmoud Dowlatabadi
Sayed Hassan Amin
Razavi Khorasan
