Kōfu (甲府市, Kōfu-shi) is the capital city of Yamanashi Prefecture in Japan.
As of November 1, 2015, the city had an estimated population of 193,127 and a population density of 909 persons per km2. The total area was 212.41 square kilometres (82.01 sq mi). Kōfu's name means "capital of Kai Province". During the Sengoku period, it was famous as the stronghold of Takeda Shingen.
Kōfu is located in north-central Yamanashi Prefecture, extending from the northern border of the prefecture with Nagano Prefecture, south until it almost reaches the southern border of the prefecture. It is narrow along its east-west axis. The city bisects the Kofu Basin, and is at an elevation of between 250 and 300 meters, surrounded by mountains on all sides. Much of the northern portion of the city is within the borders of the Chichibu-Tama-Kai National Park
Yamanashi Prefecture
Kai, Yamanashi, Fuefuki, Hokuto, Chūō, Shōwa, Fujikawaguchiko, Ichikawamisato, Minobu
Nagano Prefecture
Kawakami,
Archaeologists have discovered evidence of human settlement in the Kōfu area dating to the Japanese Paleolithic period, with continuous settlement through the Jomon, Yayoi and Kofun periods. During the Nara period, the provincial temple of Kai Province was established in what is now Kōfu, indicating that the Nara period provincial capital was located nearby, as the name of the city implies. During the Heian period, a branch of the Minamoto clan, the “Kai-Genji” ruled over vast shōen estates, and developed a military force noted for its use of cavalry. By the Muromachi period, a branch of the Kai-Genji, the Takeda clan came to dominate the area, and built a castle in what is now part of Kōfu. Under the rule of Takeda Nobutora, Kōfu was rebuilt as a castle town starting in 1519, and remained the capital of the Takeda clan under Takeda Shingen and his son Takeda Katsuyori. During the Edo period, Kai Province was tenryō territory ruled directly to by the Tokugawa shogunate, and Kōfu Castle remained its administrative center. Following the Meiji restoration, with the establishment of the municipalities system, the town of Kōfu was proclaimed on July 1, 1889. During World War II, much of the city was destroyed by United States Army Air Forces B-29 Superfortress bombers during a major air raid during the night of 6 July 1945.
Kōfu is designated as one of the special cities of Japan. On March 1, 2006, Kōfu, with a population of 193,795, absorbed the town of Nakamichi (from Higashiyatsushiro District), and the northern part of the village of Kamikuishiki (from Nishiyatsushiro District) increasing the population to 201,184.
Kōfu has the typical Honshū humid subtropical climate, though it is less wet than either the south or Sea of Japan coast due to its location in a shielded mountain valley. Temperature ranges are noticeably greater than in coastal regions: in 2004 Kōfu reached a temperature of 40 °C (104 °F) previously almost unknown in Japan, and it has fallen below 0 °C (32 °F) as early as 26 October, which is about a month before the earliest freezing temperatures in such coastal cities as Kanazawa or Tokyo.
University of Yamanashi
Yamanashi Prefectural University
Yamanashi Gakuin University
Yamanashi Eiwa College
Yamanashi Gakuin Junior College
Kōfu has 25 public and two private elementary schools, eleven public, three private middle schools and one combined national elementary/middle school, and eight public and five private high schools.
East Japan Railway Company – Chūō Main Line
Kōfu - Ryūō
Central Japan Railway Company - Minobu Line
Kokubo - Kai-Sumiyoshi - Minami-Kōfu - Zenkōji - Kanente - Kōfu
Chūō Expressway
National Route 20
National Route 52
National Route 140
National Route 137
National Route 358
National Route 411
Yamanashi Broadcasting System
UHF Television Yamanashi
Kai-Zenkō-ji temple
Maizuru Castle Park
Takeda Shrine
Yōgaiyama Castle
Yumura Spa
Yamanashi Science Museum
Shōsen Kyō (Valley)
Banjō Ginga – voice actor
Hideo Hagiwara – woodblock print artist
Tsuneo Horiuchi – former manager of Yomiuri Giants baseball team
Takao Kajimoto – former professional baseball player and sports announcer
Yoshinobu Kanemaru – professional wrestler
Hidetoshi Nakata - football player who last played with the Bolton Wanderers in the Premier League, but has since retired following the 2006 World Cup.
Naoko Takeuchi – manga artist, creator of Sailor Moon and other comics.
Fujizakura Yoshimori – former sumo wrestler
A J-League football team, Ventforet Kofu is based in Kōfu. They currently play in the J. League Division 1, and their home ground is the Kose Sports Stadium.
Yamanashi Iida Baseball Stadium
 Des Moines, Iowa, USA,  since August 16, 1958
 Pau, Pyrénées-Atlantiques, France,  since August 18, 1975
 Lodi, California, USA, since April 11, 1981
 Chengdu, China, since September 27, 1984
 Yamatokoriyama, Nara, Japan, since January 22, 1992
 Cheongju, South Korea, since September 26, 2002
