Nevesinje (Serbian Cyrillic: Невесиње) is a town and municipality in Bosnia and Herzegovina, located in the east of the historical region of Herzegovina, between Mostar and Gacko. It is administratively part of the Republika Srpska entity.
The municipality of Nevesinje is located in southern part of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This mountaneus municipality covers 1,040 km2 (402 sq mi) and average elevation is 860 m above the sea level. A large Karst plain dominates the municipality.
The annals of the Patriarchate of Peć mentioned Nevesinje in 1219, which is the earliest appearance of Nevesinje in preserved historical sources. The župa (county) of Nevesinje was held by Serbian prince Stefan Konstantin between 1303–06.
The Nevesinje region was under the rule of different medieval lords until the end of the 15th century. The most significant ruler of Nevesinje from this period was Stefan Kosača, known as Herceg Stefan. The whole land Hercegovina was named after him. Stefan's lands were under the constant treat from advancing Turkish forces in the 15th century. Hercegovina, and thus Nevesinje were gradually incorporated into the Turkish Empire by the first quarter of the 15th century (1422).
During the period of Turkish rule Nevesinje was mostly part of Bosnian Pashaluk and was a seat of a qadi. It was at Nevesinje that the Great Eastern Crisis was ignited, with the outbreak of the Serbian Herzegovinian rebellion of 1875-1878 when Serbians of the region rebelled against Turkish tax collectors. The rebellion soon spread to the rest of Herzegovina and to Bosnia and other parts of the Ottoman Empire. Neighbouring states, Serbia, Montenegro and Bulgaria got involved in the conflict which in turn pulled in great powers of the time. The conflict ended with Congress of Berlin in 1878 and the province of Bosnia and Herzegovina was placed under the administration of Austria-Hungary. At the same time Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro were declared independent principalities.
People of Nevesinje continued their struggle against foreign rule with an uprising against Austria-Hungary in 1882. This uprising is interesting because it was the first time that Orthodox Serbs and Muslim Bosniaks fought on the same side under the slogan: "For the holy cross and the faith of Muhammad" (Za krst časni i vjeru Muhamedovu).
The last census was done in 1991 so present population facts are based on estimates. Currently, the municipality's population is estimated to be around 18,000. Approximately 10,000 of those are permanent residents while the remaining 8,000 are listed as refugees. Many of these refuges ended up in Nevesinje as a result of population shifts that occurred during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina 1992-1995 and have lived In Nevesinje for over 10 years. Almost 25% of people living in the municipality are over 60 years of age. The unemployment rate is very high and many younger people are leaving Nevesinje looking for employment in other parts of the former Yugoslavia, or even further in Europe or overseas. In June 1992, during the war, 305 Bosniaks and 12 Croats were killed in Nevesinje. The rest of these two nations were forced to flee.
There are 56 settlements in the Nevesinje municipality.
Batkovići, Bežđeđe, Biograd, Bojišta, Borovčići, Bratač, Budisavlje, Donja Bijenja, Donji Drežanj, Donji Lukavac, Dramiševo, Gaj, Gornja Bijenja, Gornji Drežanj, Gornji Lukavac, Grabovica, Hrušta, Humčani, Jasena, Jugovići, Kifino Selo, Kljen, Kljuna, Kovačići, Krekovi, Kruševljani, Lakat, Luka, Miljevac, Nevesinje, Odžak, Plužine, Podgrađe, Postoljani, Presjeka, Pridvorci, Prkovići, Rabina, Rast, Rilja, Rogače, Seljani, Slato, Sopilja, Studenci, Šehovina, Šipačno, Trtine, Trusina, Udrežnje, Zaborani, Zalom, Zalužje, Zovi Do, Žiljevo, Žuberin and Žulja.
Nevesinje has a bus station and daily buses head from Nevesinje to Podgorica, Montenegro via the towns Gacko, Bileća and Trebinje within Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Nikšić and Danilovgrad within Montenegro. Local buses link the town with Mostar. The town also has direct buses for Dubrovnik in Croatia and Belgrade in Serbia.
Safvet-beg Bašagić, writer
Borislav Arapović, poet, linguist, literary scholar
Dražen Bogopenec, was a county lord (župan) in Zagorje
Pero Zubac, writer, poet
