Rio das Ostras (Portuguese pronunciation: [ˌχiu.dajˈzoʃtɾaʃ]) is a municipality located in the Brazilian state of Rio de Janeiro.
Its population is 105,757 (2010) and its area is 231 km².
It was historically a part of the neighboring municipality of Casimiro de Abreu, so some of the real estate title histories must be traced there.
The municipality holds part of the União Biological Reserve, home to a population of endangered golden lion tamarin.
Endowed with beautiful beaches, has received large investments in infrastructure applicable from the royalties awarded by Petrobras in the area in question. The most popular beaches are: Praia da Tartaruga, Praia do Centro, Praia do Bosque e Costa Azul. One of the most visited spots in the city is the Praça da Baleia, the end of the beach of Costa Azul. In this square there is a statue of Humpback whale carved bronze.
Its 15 beaches enchant the preservation and infrastructure. The visitor finds calm waters, perfect for swimming. But those who prefer extreme emotions can count on perfect for surfing beaches.
Praia do Abricó: First Beach of the Rio das Ostras from the city of Rio de Janeiro. Fascinating landscape and great tranquility.
Praia da Tartaruga: Located in a small cove, located between the beaches Abricó and Bosque, so named by the incidence of turtles on site.
Praia do Bosque: Situated between the beaches Centro and Tartaruga stand out for leafy trees that resemble a forest. Has depth. Ideal for swimming and great stretch of sand that promotes the practice of sports such as beach volleyball.
Praia do Centro: Ideal for those who want to enjoy a quiet beach, but do not give up the infrastructure and the comfort of the bars, restaurants and kiosks.
Praia do Cemitério: Beach cove perfect for swimming, very close to the City Centre. Where the small fishing boats and nets make up the landscape. It's there if you can have the best view of the setting sun from Rio das Ostras.
Praia da Boca da Barra: Beach from the mouth of the river Rio das Ostras, where the waters are in a different show. Own children. Has infrastructure kiosks and restaurants and has undergone a process of revitalization.
Praia da Joana: Small beach that makes up the natural monument of rocky headlands, environmentally protected area of rare beauty.
Praia Virgem: A perfect place to enjoy nature in all its fullness, away from the hustle of the city center. Conducive to fishing practice, as fly and diving fishing.
Praia das Areias Negras: Beach horseshoe shaped. The name is due to the darker color of the sand, with large amounts of monazite.
Praia do Remanso: Next to the Praça da Baleia is a sandy cove formed by rocks. Has infrastructure and is frequented by families with children. http://www.riodasostras.rj.gov.br
Praia de Costa Azul: With 2.3 km, is an ocean beach, point of surfers, bodyboarders and fishing enthusiasts reed. Much of his waterfront was awarded the most modern urban project in the region.
Praia Enseada das Gaivotas: One of the quietest beaches of the Rio das Ostras. His broad expanse of sand is itself the walks at the seaside.
Praia de Itapebussus: A perfect place to enjoy nature, away from the hustle of the city center. Conducive to fishing practice, as fly and diving fishing.
Praia do Mar do Norte: Beach nearest the city of Macaé, known for its cliffs and preserved by salt marsh vegetation.
Praia das Pedrinhas: One of the most beautiful beaches of the city, perfect for enjoying a quiet day away from the hustle of downtown.
