Ängelholm is a locality and the seat of Ängelholm Municipality in Skåne County, Sweden with 39,612 inhabitants in 2010.
The old settlement Rynestad was mentioned around the year 1600. The new city got its charter from king Christian II of Denmark in 1516. The town remained small for centuries. Following the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658, Ängelholm, together with the rest of Scania, was assigned by Denmark to Sweden. The town began to grow in the 19th century due to industrialization. It was also a garrison town until 1883 and had an airforce base between 1941 and 2009. The older spelling Engelholm was retained until 1912, when the city council decided to adopt a more modern spelling in line with the Swedish spelling reform of 1906. The high-performance car manufucturer Koenigsegg Automotive is based on the premises of the decommissioned F 10 Ängelholm airbase.
Tourism is an important industry to the city. It has a 6-kilometer long sandy beach right outside the town. The winds in Skälderviken bay make the beach a resort for sailors, wave surfers and wind surfers.
There is also an ice cream manufacturer, Engelholms Glass which produces about 1.2 million litres of ice-cream every year.
A special sight of Ängelholm is the UFO-Memorial Ängelholm.
It is known for its clay cuckoos — a special kind of ocarina. This is however a dying tradition as there is now only one producer of clay cuckoos, Sofia Nilsson. Ängelholm has the only orchestra of clay cuckoos in the whole world with which performed at the "Allsång på Skansen" in 2007.
Ängelholm is also the home of hockey team Rögle BK which will compete in the SHL 2015-2016.
Emma Andersson, singer, model, chef, and TV personality
Malik Bendjelloul, Academy Award winning filmmaker
Gösta Carlsson, road racing cyclist
Jörgen Elofsson, songwriter
Anna Fiske, illustrator and writer
Roger Hansson, ice hockey player
Jill Johnson, singer
Jörgen Jönsson, hockey player
Kenny Jönsson, ice hockey player
Christian von Koenigsegg, automotive mogul
Jarl Kulle, actor and director
Rikard Nilsson chef
Maria Rooth, ice hockey player
Anton Santesson (born 1994), ice hockey defenceman
Jenny Silver, singer
Peter Wichers
Sebastian Andersson,Footballer
