Thetford Mines (Canada 2011 Census population 25,709) is a town in south-central Quebec, Canada. It is the seat of Les Appalaches Regional County Municipality.
Thetford Mines was founded in 1876 after the discovery of large asbestos deposits in the area, and the city became a hub for one of the world's largest asbestos-producing regions. In 2001 the city expanded to its current boundaries, merging with Black Lake, Robertsonville, Pontbriand and Thetford-Sud.
Thetford Mines is the seat of the judicial district of Frontenac.
Winter
Given the abundance of snow for several months in winter, it is a popular area for snowmobiling and four-wheel drive vehicles as well as for downhill and cross-country skiing, the main ski trails are at Mount Adstock [1]
The city is home to the minor-pro ice hockey team the Thetford Mines Isothermic, who are members of the Ligue Nord-Américaine de Hockey (LNAH). They play home games at Centre Mario Gosselin. Thetford Mines is the only city to have hosted an LNAH team in every season since the league's 1996 inception. The city has ringette and hockey organisations for the youth, and there are yearly tournaments for ringette and minor Hockey players, as well as old-timers hockey tournaments.
Thetford Mines was chosen as a top-five finalist for Kraft Hockeyville for 2009 on the February 21, 2009 Hockey Night In Canada "Hockey Day In Canada" special.
Spring
Spring is maple syrup producing time in the area. The numerous stands of maple trees in the region makes it one of the top maple syrup producing regions in the world. In March and early April, local citizens often make a ritual outing to one of the area's sugar camps (or cabanes à sucre) for sugaring off parties where maple syrup, reduced and thickened by slow boiling, is poured over fresh snow to create a delightful taffy.
Summer
Summer brings a host of other outdoor activities. An abundance of lakes and rivers provide plenty of opportunities for outdoor gatherings and cool refreshment. A series of summer festivals add to the enjoyment of the season, with sporting events, concerts and fireworks.
Fall
The same maples that produce syrup in spring, provide brilliant displays of colour in autumn.
Köppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as humid continental (Dfb). Winters are very cold, rainy and snowy, while summers are warm and rainy when it receives more precipitation.
Two radio stations, CFJO ("O97,3") and CKLD ("Past-Rock 105,5") serve Thetford Mines. Both stations air programming produced partially in Thetford Mines and partially in Victoriaville.
Michaëlle Jean, former Governor General of Canada and current Secretary-General of La Francophonie. She originally settled in Thetford Mines, after immigrating to Canada from Haiti
Raymond Setlakwe, entrepreneur, lawyer, and former Quebec senator
Bob Fillion, late hockey player with the Montreal Canadiens
Simon Gamache, hockey player, formerly in the NHL
Mario Gosselin, hockey player
Michel Louvain, French Canadian singer and television presenter
Patrice Tardif, hockey player, formerly in the NHL
Daniel Poudrier, retired hockey player, city councillor
