Haukipudas is a town and former municipality of Finland. It is located in the province of Oulu and part of the Northern Ostrobothnia region. Its shore runs along the Gulf of Bothnia, with the river Kiiminkijoki running through the province. Along with Kiiminki, Oulunsalo and Yli-Ii municipalities it was merged with the city of Oulu on 1 January 2013.
The municipality had a population of 19,053 (31 December 2012) and covered an area of 1,023.62 km2 (395.22 sq mi) of which 224.95 km2 (86.85 sq mi) is water. The population density is 23.8559/km2 (61.7865/sq mi).
The municipality was unilingually Finnish.
There were 16 villages in Haukipudas: Kirkonkylä, Santaholma, Ukonkaivos, Martinniemi, Asemakylä, Onkamo, Halosenniemi, Holstinmäki, Häyrysenniemi, Jokikylä, Kalimeenkylä, Kello, Kiviniemi, Parkumäki, Takkuranta and Virpiniemi.
The educational department took part in Lifelong Learning Programme 2007–2013 in Finland.
The Haukipudas Church, built in 1762.
Kiviniemi, a fishing village
Virpiniemi
Kurtinhaudan beach-forest
Halosenniemi
Haukiputaan homestead
The following is a compilation of some of the islands of Haukipudas located just off the coast of the Gulf of Bothnia:
Hanhikari, Hietakari, Hoikka-Hiue, Iso-Hiue, Iso-Miehikkä, Isonkivenletto, Kaasamatala (Hiuvet), Kattilankalla, Kellon Kraaseli, Kintasletto, Kotakari, Kriisinkivi, Kropsu, Laitakari, Lemmonletto, Länsiletto, Lönkytin, Mustakari, Mustakari (Martinniemi), Nimetön, Pallonen, Pensaskari, Pikku-Miehikkä, Pulkkisenmatala, Puukkoletto, Rapakari, Rivinletto (Kaasamatala), Santapankki, Satakarinletto, Ulko-Pallonen, Välikari, Ykskivi, Väliletto, Äijänkumpele.
Päivi Alasalmi, writer
Veikko Enckell, pop lyricist
Matti Hannus, sports writer
Tytti Isohookana-Asunmaa, Minister and Member of Parliament (Centre Party)
Osmo Jussila, political historian
Juhani Laitala, actor
Merja Larivaara, actor
Lea Laven, entertainer and singer
Hjalmar Lindqvist, Member of Parliament (Social Democratic Party)
Yrjö Murto, Minister and Member of Parliament (Finnish People's Democratic League)
Miika Nousiainen, writer
Sakari Pietilä, ice hockey player
Lasse Pirjetä, ice hockey player
Samuli Pohjamo, Member of the European Parliament
Jukka Poika, singer
Jukka Rasila, actor
Riitta-Liisa Roponen, cross-country skier
Joni Skiftesvik, writer
Jukka Takalo, singer
Eero Tapio, Olympic wrestler
Mirja Vehkaperä, Member of Parliament (Centre Party)
