Yilan City (Chinese: 宜蘭市; pinyin: Yílán Shì; Wade–Giles: I2-lan2 Shih4) is a city and the county seat of Yilan County, Taiwan. The city lies on the north side of the Lanyang River.
The Yilan Plain in which the city is located has historically been referred to as Kapalan (Chinese: 蛤仔難; Pe̍h-ōe-jī: Kap-á-lān), Kapsulan (蛤仔蘭; Kap-chú-lân; also 甲子蘭), Komalan (噶瑪蘭; Kat-má-lán), etc. These names, as well as that of Yilan itself, were given to the sites by the Kavalan tribe of Taiwanese aborigines. Later arrivals included Han Chinese settlers during the Qing Dynasty in China (1802) and settlers from Okinawa during Taiwan's Japanese era (1895-1945).
In 1810 under Qing dynasty rule, a formal administration office was established at Wuwei (五圍) and "Komalan Subprefecture" (噶瑪蘭廳; Kat-má-lán Thiaⁿ) was at the present day location of Yilan City. Construction of the city wall was completed a year later. After a few years once the basic infrastructure was ready, the city assumed the political, economical, cultural and educational center for the Lanyang Plain. In 1878, Komalan was a large rice production area commonly called Kapsulan, and became a district called Gilan Hsien. It was one of the three new districts that constituted the new Taipeh Prefecture.
According to the 1904 census, the population of Giran town was about 15,000.
After the handover of Taiwan from Japan to the Republic of China on 25 October 1945, Yilan City was created in January 1946 as a county-controlled city the county seat of the newly created Yilan County and continue to become the political, economical and cultural centers of the region.
Yilan City is located on Lanyang Plain with an average altitude of 7.38 meters above sea level.
Area: 29.40 km²
Population: 95,928 people (2014)
Yilan City consists of 40 villages and 543 neighborhoods. Villages in Yilan City are: Minzu Village, Jianjun Village, Taishan Village, Fuguo Village, Siyuan Village, Qijie Village, Wenhua Village, Fuxing Village, Minquan Village, Shennong Village, Daxin Village, Xinmin Village, Jinshi Village, Nanqiao Village, Kaixuan Village, Nanjin Village, Jianye Village, Baili Village, Yanping Village, Chenggong Village, Tungcun Village, Xintung Village, Liming Village, Qizhang Village, Xiaolian Village, Tungmen Village, Xiaotung Village, Caiyuan Village, Cian Village, Zhongxing Village, Xinsheng Village, Jiaobai Village, Beijin Village, Meizhou Village, Nanmen Village, Zhongshan Village, Ximen Village and Beimen Village.
Yilan County Government
Yilan County Council
Institute of Yilan County History
Memorial Hall of Founding of Yilan Administration
Yilan Brick Kiln
Yilan Distillery Chia Chi Lan Wine Museum
Yilan City is accessible by Yilan Station of the Taiwan Railways Administration.
 Leawood, Kansas, United States (1988)
 Madera, California, United States (1994)
 Lowell, Massachusetts, United States (1997)
 Brunswick, Georgia, United States (2009)
Yilan County, Taiwan
Takekoshi, Yosaburō (1907). Japanese rule in Formosa. London, New York, Bombay and Calcutta: Longmans, Green, and co. OCLC 753129. OL 6986981M. 
