Qianjiang (simplified Chinese: 潜江; traditional Chinese: 潛江; pinyin: Qiánjiāng) is a sub-prefecture-level city of south-central Hubei province, People's Republic of China.
Qianjiang is located in south-central Hubei province in the Jianghan Plain. Its area is 2,004 square kilometres (774 sq mi)
Qianjiang's climate is temperate. Average annual temperature is 17 °C (63 °F).
There were many small lakes, ponds, and rivers scattered around the Qianjiang area. However, starting in the early 80's most of them disappeared due to urbanization and industrialization.
China National Highway 318
Qianjiang became a county in 965 during the Song dynasty. It was the early center of the Chu State.
Qianjiang was occupied by the Japanese during the Sino-Japan War. The Japanese primarily used prominent local Chinese to run the "puppet" government, notably many members of the Zhang family.
The communists from 1949 to early 1980s constructed a pharmaceutical plant, a textile factory, a book-printing factory, a large oil-and-gas drilling field, and other industrial installations in the Qianjiang area. As the national economic reform took force beginning in the late 1970s many of these state-run businesses went under.
Qianjiang was rarely ranked no. 1 in any way. However, during the period of 1959 and 1962, the largest "Cadre Camp" in China, or in the world as people at that time liked to call it, was established in Qianjiang. It was a result of the potential Sino-Russian War. The China-Russian relationship just broke up and military conflict was taking place in northern Chinese border with Russia. The Chinese government was afraid that a total war was about to break out against the Soviet. So they dispersed a lot of people and resources throughout the country. The young college graduates were sent to local Cadre Camps to train and entrench. This was the so-called "Priority 1 Order" given by Vice Chairman Lin Biao and planned by Chairman Mao.
The young cadres in Qianjiang worked hard to improve the agricultural situation. E.g., there was an ancient lake of hundreds of acres in the Qianjiang area. They drained the lake and converted it to farming land. From today's perspective, it was a wrong action that caused damage to the nature and eco-system, which in turn affected negatively the agricultural environment and cycle.
Qianjiang was well known for abundant local produces. Prominent local produces include duck eggs and lily seeds. They were so abundant that the produces were often sold at a nominal price. However, around the year of 1960, Qianjiang didn't escape the fate of most Chinese towns and was swept by an extended famine that was grossly caused by the political destruction of the fundamental aspects of the economy (production, supply-chain, and ownership). Many in Qianjiang were starved to death.
People from Qianjiang and surrounding areas, compared with people from the rest of the Hubei Province, have a reputation for being generous, gentle, and sincere. Prior to the modern days, Qianjiang demonstrated traditional, agriculture-based, Chinese ethos. E.g., if the farmers consider a water buffalo has been hard-working and loyal they would not slaughter it. But rather they would wait until it ages and dies. Then they would bury it and then build it a tomb.
There was a labor camp during the communist era in the Qianjiang area. The conditions at the camp were harsh. People would often sneak out to seek additional food. However, they never attempted to escape because it was impossible to hide in any place during those decades. Every town was tightly controlled and monitored by the government. No one would provide a stranger shelter and would only report him immediately to the local government.
Qianjiang has 15 towns, 1 economic development zone, and 6 management areas.
Qianjiang's population is just over 1 million.
Qianjiang has an important oil field, Jianghan Oil Field. It's part of the Sinopec Corporation. Qianjiang has the potential of producing 200 million tons of oil, more than 9000 m3 of natural gas, and 800 billion tons of rock salt.
