Van Nuys /vænˈnaɪz/ is a neighborhood in the central San Fernando Valley region of the city of Los Angeles, California.
The town was founded in 1911, and named for Isaac Newton Van Nuys, one of its developers. It was annexed by Los Angeles on May 22, 1915, after completion of the Los Angeles Aqueduct, providing it with the water required for further growth. Van Nuys was the first new stop on the San Fernando Line of the Pacific Electric Railway red cars system, which boosted its early land sales and commercial success.
Van Nuys became the Valley's satellite Los Angeles municipal civic center, with the 1932 Art Deco Valley Municipal Building (Van Nuys City Hall), a visual landmark and Los Angeles Historic-Cultural Monument starting the present day Government Center complex of government services buildings.
In 1991 Marvin Braude, a member of the Los Angeles City Council, redesignated a 45-block area from being a part of Van Nuys to being a part of Sherman Oaks. This redesignated area included the community of Magnolia Woods. Some area residents had presented a petition and several original deeds that stated "Sherman Oaks" to Braude. They argued that the area was originally a part of Sherman Oaks until the 1960s, when ZIP codes labeling the area as Van Nuys were established.
In 2014, A "Great Streets" project was introduced by Mayor Eric Garcetti with Van Nuys Blvd. to be redesigned between Victory Blvd. and Oxnard Street. Also, Sepulveda Blvd. was resurfaced between Victory Blvd and Oxnard Street in May 2014. A new Los Angeles County services building is under construction on the southwest corner of Van Nuys Blvd. and Saticoy Street in 2014.
On February 14, 2016, some 170 firefighters battled a fire at the abandoned Voyager Motel at 6500 N. Sepulveda Blvd.
Van Nuys is bordered on the north by North Hills, on the northeast by Panorama City, on the east by Valley Glen, on the south by Sherman Oaks, on the southwest by the Sepulveda Basin, on the west by Lake Balboa and on the northwest by Northridge. Its street and other boundaries are Roscoe Boulevard on the north, Sepulveda Boulevard, the Tujunga Wash, Woodman Avenue and Hazeltine Avenue on the east, Oxnard Street on the south, the Sepulveda Basin on the southwest and Odessa and Hayvenhurst avenues and Balboa Boulevard on the west.
The 2000 U.S. census counted 103,770 residents in the 8.99-square-mile Van Nuys neighborhood—or 11,542 people per square mile, about an average population density for the city. In 2008, the city estimated that the population had increased to 110,747. In 2000 the median age for residents was 28, considered young for city and county neighborhoods, and the percentages of residents aged 10 or younger and 19 to 34 were among the county's highest.
The neighborhood was considered "moderately diverse" ethnically within Los Angeles. The breakdown was Hispanics, 60.5%; whites, 23.1%; Asians, 6.4%; blacks, 6%; and others, 4%. Mexico (41.5%) and El Salvador (17.3%) were the most common places of birth for the 49.8% of the residents who were born abroad—a high percentage for Los Angeles. There were 4,917 families headed by single parents, or 21.3%, considered high for both the city and the county.
The median yearly household income in 2008 dollars was $41,134, considered average for the city but low for the county. The percentages of households that earned $40,000 or less were high for the county. Renters occupied 73.9% of the housing stock, and house- or apartment-owners held 26.1%.
Van Nuys Boulevard
Metro Orange Line bicycle path
Van Nuys FlyAway Bus service
Galpin Auto Sports — "Pimp My Ride" (seasons 5 and 6).
Busch Gardens theme park (1964–1979), demolished.
Sound City Studios
Los Angeles Fire Department operates Station 39 (Van Nuys), Station 90 Van Nuys Airport Area, Station 100 West Van Nuys, and Station 102 East Van Nuys, serving the community.
The Los Angeles Police Department operates the nearby Van Nuys Community Police Station at 6420 Sylmar Avenue, 91401, serving the neighborhood.
The United States Postal Service operates the Civic Center Van Nuys Post Office at 6200 Van Nuys Boulevard in Van Nuys and the Van Nuys Post Office at 15701 Sherman Way in the Lake Balboa neighborhood in Los Angeles, west of Van Nuys.
The U.S. Census Bureau operates the Los Angeles Regional Office in Van Nuys.
The California Department of Developmental Services operates the North Los Angeles County Regional Center on Sherman Way west of Sepulveda Boulevard in which it serves the large fast-growing population of developmentally disabled people in the San Fernando Valley being helped by the Government of California to house the developmentally disabled people in the area and help them meet special needs of normal life with special benefits.
The Social Security Administration operates a branch office on Van Nuys Boulevard north of Victory Boulevard in Van Nuys.
The Van Nuys Recreation Area is in Van Nuys. The area has an auditorium and gymnasium with a capacity of 420 people, and a multipurpose/community room with a capacity of 20–25 people. The area has barbecue pits, lighted baseball diamonds, lighted outdoor basketball courts, a children's play area, a community room, lighted handball courts, an indoor gymnasium with no weights, picnic tables, a lighted soccer field, and lighted tennis courts.
Delano Park in Van Nuys has an auditorium, barbecue pits, a lighted baseball diamond, lighted outdoor basketball courts, a children's play area, a lighted football field, lighted handball courts, an indoor gymnasium with no weights, picnic tables, and a lighted soccer field.
The Van Nuys adjacent Sepulveda Basin Recreation Area to the west is a large open space park behind Sepulveda Dam. The Metro Orange Line bicycle path connects Van Nuys to it and other valley destinations. It has numerous recreation facilities and natural areas, including a wildlife preserve, cricket complex, and archery range at Woodley Park.
The Van Nuys Sherman Oaks Park is in Sherman Oaks, near Van Nuys. The park has an auditorium, two lighted baseball diamonds, six unlighted baseball diamonds, lighted indoor basketball courts, lighted outdoor basketball courts, a children's play area, a 60-person community room, a lighted football field, an indoor gymnasium without weights, picnic tables, a lighted soccer field, and lighted tennis courts. Located in the same place as the park, the Van Nuys Sherman Oaks Pool is a seasonal outdoor heated swimming pool. The Van Nuys Sherman Oaks Senior Citizen Center (a.k.a. Bernardi Center), also on the park grounds, has an auditorium and multi-purpose room. The senior community hall also has two community/meeting rooms, two kitchens, a play area, a shuffle board area, a stage, and two storage rooms. The Van Nuys Sherman Oaks Tennis Courts facility in the Van Nuys Sherman Oaks Park has eight courts.
Fifteen percent of Van Nuys residents aged 25 and older had earned a four-year degree by 2000, an average figure for both the city and the county, but the percentage of the same-age residents who had less than a high school diploma (43.1%) was high for Los Angeles.
Schools within the Van Nuys boundaries are:
The Los Angeles Unified School District operates district public schools:
Van Nuys Senior High School, 6535 Cedros Avenue
Cohasset Street Elementary School, 15810 Saticoy Street
Robert Fulton College Preparatory School, 7477 Kester Avenue
Valerio Street Elementary School, 15035 Valerio Street
Hazeltine Avenue Elementary School, 7150 Hazeltine Avenue
Columbus Avenue Elementary School, 6700 Columbus Avenue
Van Nuys Elementary School, 6464 Sylmar Avenue
Will Rogers Continuation School, 14711 Gilmore Street
Sylvan Park Elementary School, 6238 Noble Avenue
Vista Middle School, 15040 Roscoe Boulevard
Van Nuys Adult School, 6535 Cedros Avenue
NVOC- Aviation Center, 16550 Saticoy Street
Charter schools include:
Charter High School of Arts — Multimedia and Performing, 6952 Van Nuys Boulevard
Van Nuys Middle School was in the Van Nuys community until 1991 when its area was moved into Sherman Oaks. The school continued to use the name "Van Nuys" despite the move.
Pacific Ridge School, 15339 Saticoy Street
Crossroads School, 6843 Lennox Avenue
St. Elisabeth School, elementary, 6635 Tobias Avenue
Grace Christian Academy, 6510 Peach Avenue
The Crawford Academy, 14530 Sylvan Street
Children's Community School, 14702 Sylvan Street
Montclair College Prep, 8071 Sepulveda Boulevard, has closed.
Lycée International de Los Angeles previously operated a campus in Van Nuys.
The Van Nuys Branch Library of the Los Angeles Public Library serves the community.
Van Nuys Airport, the busiest general aviation airport in the world, the 25th busiest airport in the United States, and among the 20 busiest airports in the world by aircraft movements, is located in Van Nuys.
The closest airport with commercial airline service is Bob Hope Airport in Burbank.
The community includes a terminal for the Van Nuys FlyAway Bus service, which travels from Van Nuys to Los Angeles International Airport.
Van Nuys has two Metro Orange Line stations, the Van Nuys (Los Angeles Metro station), and the Sepulveda (Los Angeles Metro station).
The Orange Line connects to the Metro Red Line subway at the North Hollywood (Los Angeles Metro station), for access to Hollywood, Downtown Los Angeles, and other Los Angeles Metro lines.
The Metro Liner also uses the Van Nuys station. All stations, and the neighborhood's major streets, are served by Metro Local, Metro Rapid, and/or other bus lines and systems.
The Metro Orange Line bicycle path and pedestrian walkway runs in a landscaped zone alongside the entire route, to Pierce College, Canoga Park, and the Chatsworth Station on the west, and North Hollywood on the east.
Van Nuys is directly served by the 405 (San Diego Freeway) passing through it.
Other nearby freeways include: the Route 101 (Ventura Freeway), the Route 170 (Hollywood Freeway), the Route 118 (Simi Valley Freeway), and the Golden State Freeway section of Interstate 5.
Van Nuys Boulevard has a long and diverse commercial district along it, as do other major streets crossing through Van Nuys.
From 1947 until 1992, GM operated an automobile factory called Van Nuys Assembly at the location of Van Nuys Boulevard and Arminta Street to augment their production efforts at their South Gate, California factory called South Gate Assembly which opened in 1936. The Van Nuys location manufactured the Chevrolet Impala, the Chevrolet Corvair, and later was the primary location for the Chevrolet Nova and the Chevrolet Camaro. Badge engineered versions of the Impala, Nova and Camaro were also manufactured at this location. Due to air quality remediation efforts, and decreasing market share of GM products, the factory was closed.
Sound City Studios was a very well-respected recording studio located in Van Nuys. Van Nuys, along with Chatsworth, is home to numerous pornographic movie studios, distributors, and manufacturers.
Grupo TACA operates a Van Nuys-area TACA Center at 6710 Van Nuys Boulevard.
Some former Van Nuys neighborhoods have won approval by the Los Angeles City Council to break off from Van Nuys and join the neighboring communities of Lake Balboa, Valley Glen and Sherman Oaks in an effort to raise their property values. City Council member Tony Cardenas "suggested the change was motivated by racism."
Ernani Bernardi (1911–2006), musician and member of the Los Angeles City Council, 1961–93
Brandon Boyd vocalist of the American Multi-Platinum rock band Incubus.
Bishop Joseph V. Brennan, Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles
Andy Devine, actor, honorary mayor from 1938 to 1957
Don Drysdale, Hall of Fame baseball player
Laurence D. Fink, financier
Brian Austin Green, actor
Robert Harland, actor
Chris Holdsworth, UFC fighter
Michael Landau, musician
Jon Locke, western television actor
Delamere Francis McCloskey, Los Angeles City Council member, 1941–43
Ken Michelman, actor
Marilyn Monroe, iconic actress
Matt Moore, professional football player
Chris Pinnick, musician
Robert Redford, actor, director, producer
Jake Richardson, actor
Shorty Rogers, jazz musician and arranger
Gavin Rossdale, musician
Jane Russell, actress
Herbert Ryman, artist and Disney imagineer
Gwen Stefani, musician
Miss Coco Peru, actor and drag performer
Nikki Sixx - bassist/founder of Mötley Crüe and of Sixx:A.M.
Bob Walk, former MLB player and current broadcaster
Bob Waterfield, professional football player
Hobart Johnstone Whitley, real-estate developer
Cindy Williams, actress
Natalie Wood, actress
Brooke White, singer, American Idol Season 7 finalist
Todd Zeile, professional baseball player
History of the San Fernando Valley
