Chiyoda (千代田区, Chiyoda-ku) is a special ward located in central Tokyo, Japan. In English, it is called Chiyoda City.
Chiyoda consists of the Imperial Palace and a surrounding radius of about a kilometer. As of May 2015, the ward has an estimated population of 54,462 and a population density of 4,670 people per km², making it by far the least populated of the special wards. The total area is 11.66 km², of which the Imperial Palace, Hibiya Park, National Museum of Modern Art, and Yasukuni Shrine take up approximately 2.6 km², or 22% of the total area.
Often called the "political center" of the country, Chiyoda, literally meaning "field of a thousand generations", inherited the name from the Chiyoda Castle (the other name for Edo Castle, today's Imperial Palace). With the seat of the Emperor in the Imperial Palace at the ward's center, many government institutions, such as the National Diet, Prime Minister's Official Residence, and Supreme Court, are also located in Chiyoda, as are Tokyo landmarks such as Yasukuni Shrine, Tokyo Station, and the Budokan. Akihabara, a district known for being an otaku cultural center and a shopping district for computer goods, is also located in Chiyoda, as are fifteen embassies.
The Chiyoda ward was created on March 15, 1947 by the unification of Kanda Ward (the northeast corner of present-day Chiyoda, west of Akihabara) and Kōjimachi Ward (comprising the rest of Chiyoda). It has been a site of a number of historical events.
In 1860, the assassination of Ii Naosuke took place outside the Sakurada Gate of the Imperial Palace.
In 1932, assassins attacked and killed prime minister Inukai Tsuyoshi.
In 1936, an attempted coup d'état, the February 26 Incident, occurred.
In 1960, Socialist Party leader Inejirō Asanuma was assassinated in Hibiya Hall.
In 1995, members of Aum Shinrikyo carried out the Sarin gas attack on the Tokyo subway.
Chiyoda is located at the very heart of former Tokyo City in eastern mainland Tokyo. The central area of the ward is furthermore occupied by the Imperial Palace. The east side of the ward, bordering Chūō, is the location of Tokyo Station. The south side, bordering Minato, encompasses Hibiya Park and the National Diet Building. It is almost exclusively occupied by administrations and agencies. The west and northwest are primarily upper class residential; the Yasukuni Shrine is also there. To the north and northeast are several residential neighborhoods and the Akihabara commercial district.
Chiyoda is run by a directly elected mayor and a city assembly of 25 elected members. The current mayor is Masami Ishikawa, an independent.
For the Metropolitan Assembly, Chiyoda forms a single-member electoral district. It had been represented by Liberal Democrats for 50 years until the landslide 2009 election when then 26-year-old Democratic newcomer Zenkō Kurishita unseated 70-year-old former Metropolitan Assembly president and six term assemblyman, Liberal Democrat Shigeru Uchida. In the 2013 election, no Democrat contested the seat and Uchida won back the district against a Communist and two independents.
The Tokyo Fire Department has its headquarters in Ōtemachi in Chiyoda.
For the national House of Representatives, Chiyoda, together with Minato and Shinjuku, forms the prefecture's 1st electoral district since the electoral reform of the 1990s. The district is currently represented by Liberal Democrat Miki Yamada.
The ward is also home to the Diet of Japan, the Supreme Court of Japan and the residence of the Prime Minister of Japan and is the political nerve center of Japan.
The Embassy of the United Kingdom is in Ichibancho in Chiyoda.
The Embassy of Belgium has been located in the Kojimachi area since 1902 and at its location in Nibancho since 1928. During the reconstruction project from 2007 to 2009, the Belgian embassy was temporarily in Shibakoen, Minato ward.
The Embassy of Ireland is located in the Kōjimachi area of Chiyoda.
The Embassy of Israel is located in Niban-cho in Chiyoda.
The Embassy of the Philippines is in Fujimi in Chiyoda.
On December 31, 2001, Chiyoda had 6,572 buildings which were four stories or taller.
Some of the districts in Chiyoda are actually not inhabited, either because they are parks (Hibiya Koen), because they consist only of office buildings (Otemachi or Marunouchi), and/or because they are extremely small. The area on the eastern side of Akihabara Station is the location of several districts that cover at most a few buildings. Kanda-Hanaokachō is, for example, limited to the Yodobashi Camera department store. Understanding the address system in the Kanda area can be particularly troublesome for non-locals.
Kōjimachi Area (麹町地区), former Kōjimachi Ward (Kōjimachi-ku)
The Banchō area (actually consisting of six neighborhoods, from Ichibancho to Rokubanchō), an upper class residential area, home of the embassies of Belgium, the UK and Israel.
Chiyoda - "1 Chiyoda, Chiyoda-ku" is the official address of the Imperial Palace
Fujimi, location of the Philippines embassy as well as several schools
Hayabusachō - Houses the Supreme Court of Japan and the National Theater
Hibiya Kōen - Address for Hibiya Park, a large park south of the Imperial Palace
Hirakawachō
Iidabashi
Kasumigaseki - The nerve center of Japan's administrative agencies
Kioichō - The name, ki-o-i, is a three-kanji acronym consisting of one kanji each from the names of the Kishū Domain, Owari Domain, and Ii clan, whose daimyo residences were here during the Edo period
Kitanomaru Park, North of the imperial palace, location of the Budokan
Kōjimachi - Older residential and commercial neighborhood on the west side of the Imperial Palace, home to the embassy of Ireland
Kōkyo Gaien - large open gardens in front of the Imperial palace
Kudanminami and Kudankita (九段北) districts, around the station of Kudanshita - Northwest side of the Imperial Palace, home to Yasukuni Shrine.
Marunouchi - Located between Tokyo Station and the Imperial Palace, one of Tokyo's traditional commercial centers
Nagatachō - The location of the Diet of Japan; also houses the Hie Shrine
Ōtemachi - North of Marunouchi, a district of key financial Japanese institutions and major national newspapers
Uchisaiwaichō, close to the Hibiya Park, location of the Imperial Hotel, as well as head offices of banks (especially Mizuho Financial Group).
Yūrakuchō - South of Marunouchi, part of the Tokyo Station business district.
Kanda Area (神田地区), former Kanda Ward (Kanda-ku). Soto-Kanda, at the northern corner of the ward, home to the famous Akihabara electronics district.
The list below consists of the many smaller neighborhoods of the Kanda area, for which a modernization of the addressing system has not been enforced yet. All officially start with the prefix "Kanda-", but it is sometimes omitted in daily life. Note that Iwamotochō and Kanda-Iwamotochō are different districts (as is the case for Kajichō and Kanda-Kajichō)
On October 1, 2001, Chiyoda had 36,233 business establishments with 888,149 employees.
0verflow, Asahi Glass, Bungeishunjū, Calbee, Creatures Inc., Datam Polystar, DIC Corporation, Dowa Holdings, Furukawa Electric, HAL Laboratory, Hakusensha, Jaleco, The Japan FM Network Company, Japan Freight Railway Company, Japan Post Holdings, Kadokawa Corporation, KDDI, Konica Minolta, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, Mitsubishi Estate, MCDecaux, Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group, Mizuho Financial Group, New Otani, Nikken Sekkei, Nippon Cable, Nippon Paper Industries, Nippon Suisan Kaisha, Nitto Boseki, NTT docomo, Orient Watch Company, Seibu Kaihatsu, Seven & i Holdings, Shin-Etsu Chemical, Shogakukan, Shueisha, SMC Corporation, Sony Music Entertainment Japan, Toho, Tokio Marine Nichido, Tokuyama Corporation, Tokyo FM, Toppan Printing, Yamazaki Baking Company, Vie de France, YKK Group, and Yomiuri Shimbun are headquartered in Chiyoda. Mazda has an office in Chiyoda.
Foreign companies with Japanese divisions in Chiyoda include Aeroméxico, AMI Japan (subsidiary of American Megatrends), Chloé Japan, Hewlett-Packard Japan, LVMH, Ropes & Gray, Sidley Austin, Sunoco, and Swiss International Air Lines.
Japanese companies which formerly had their headquarters in Chiyoda include All Nippon Airways, Bandai Visual, Galaxy Airlines, Japan Airlines, Japan Asia Airways, Mitsui Chemicals, Nippon Cargo Airlines, Taito Corporation, and Yamato Life. In 1998 Fujitsu operated a branch office in Chiyoda. Prior to its disestablishment, At one point Cantor Fitzgerald had an office in Chiyoda.
Akihabara
Hibiya Park
Imperial Palace
National Diet Building
Nippon Budokan
Tokyo International Forum
Tokyo Station
Tokyo Takarazuka Theater
Home to the massive Tokyo station with a multitude of subways, railways and long-distance services.
As of May 1, 2003, Chiyoda has eight elementary schools, with 2,647 students, and five junior high schools with 1,123 students. Public elementary and junior high schools in Chiyoda are operated by the Chiyoda Board of Education. Public high schools are operated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Board of Education.
Hibiya High School
Hitotsubashi High School
Kudan High School
The Tokyo Chinese School is located in Gobanchō in the ward. Previously the Lycée Franco-Japonais de Tokyo was in Fujimi in this ward.
Hitotsubashi University's Graduate School of International Corporate Strategy is located in the National Center of Sciences in Hitotsubashi.
Both of the Sophia University Campuses are in western Chiyoda. The main Yotsuya campus lies adjacent to Yotsuya Station and the Ichigaya Campus just south of Ichigaya Station. Globis University Graduate School of Management which is the largest business school in Japan is also located in Chiyoda.
Chiyoda operates four public libraries; they are the Chiyoda Library, Yobancho Library, Shohei Library, and Kanda Library. Tokyo operates the Tokyo Metropolitan Library Hibiya Library. The Japanese government operates the National Diet Library and the National Archives. Ishikawa Enterprise Foundation Ochanomizu Library is a nearby private library.
East Imperial Garden, located on the eastern portion of the Tokyo Imperial Palace grounds and housing the castle tower and the outer defense positions of the former Edo Castle, opened to the public in 1968. Kitanomaru Park, located on Edo Castle's former northern section, has the Tokyo National Museum of Modern Art and the Nippon Budokan, a venue for performances. Chidorigafuchi Boat Arena and Chidorigafuchi Moat Path includes a waterway for boats. National Diet Building Park, located adjacent to the Diet Building and divided in two by a street, includes American dogwoods planted to symbolize the relations between the United States and Japan. Hibiya Park, Japan's first western-style park, includes restaurants, open-air concert halls, and tennis courts. Imperial Palace Outer Garden, in the front of Nijubashi Bridge, serves as a jogging trail and a tourist site.
