Khorramabad  pronunciation  (Persian: خرم‌آباد‎‎ - Khorram Abād, Luri: خورمووه - Xurrmoa; also Romanized as Khorramābād, Khoramabad, Khurramabad, Khorram Abad and Khur Ramābād) is a city in and capital of Lorestan Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 328,544, in 75,945 families. Khorramabad is situated in the Zagros Mountains. Khorramabad Airport is 3 km south of the city proper.
The city population is predominantly Lur and Lak, although the two groups are closely related. Although not a major tourist destination, it is quite scenic and possesses several attractions, such as 5 Paleolithic cave-dwelling sites. In the city center, a tall citadel called Falak-ol-Aflak (The Heaven of Heavens), a relic of the Sassanid era, is now a nationally popular museum.
Economically, it is the regional base of the agricultural industry.
Khaydalu was one of the important cities of Elam Civilization.City of Shapurkhast was built on the ruins of Khaydalu on the orders of Shapur I Sasanid.Many experts believes that the ancient city of Khaydalu was the core of current Khorramabad city.
In the texts of historians Shapurkhast has been considered one of the most important and developed cities of the region during this period.Falak-ol-Aflak castle ( Dež-e Shāpūr-Khwāst) has been built by Shapur I the Sasanid.
Probably in the late seventh century AD Shapurkhast city destroyed and people of Shapurkhast moved to west part of Falak-ol-aflak castle in terms of having plenty of water as well as safety.
Hamdallah Mustawfi Writes: Khorramabad was a beautiful city, now is destroyed.
The founder of dynasty was Abu Tahir ibn Muhammad, a descendant of the Shabankara chieftain Fadluya, who was initially a commander of the Salghurids of Fars and was appointed as the governor of Kuhgiluya, but eventually gained independence in Luristan and extended his realm as far as Isfahan and assumed the prestigious title of atabeg.
During the reign of the Safavid dynasty, Khorramabad was the governmental center of the Luristan province. In the wake of the demise of the Safavids, after the signing of the Treaty of Constantinople (1724) with Imperial Russia, the Ottomans conquered Khorramabad on 6 September 1725.
In this periods Khorramabad city was limited to neighboring of Falak-ol-aflak castle.This period was beginning of people migration from small villages to the Khorramabad city.migrations in addition to increasing population, expanded city and created new districts.
Khorramabad municipal was formed in 1913 and first city council consists of 7 members was formed in 1916.
Khorramabad has what is classed under the Köppen climate classification as a Mediterranean climate (Csa), owing to its high altitude making it much wetter than lowland cities like Baghdad or cities more shielded from the Zagros Mountains like Esfahan and Tehran. It remains extremely hot in the summer even with very low humidity, but the winter is sufficiently wet for rainfed agriculture, though much colder than classic Mediterranean climates.
Falak-ol-Aflak Castle, Dež-e Shāpūr-Khwāst, Falak-ol-Aflak Castle, in ancient times was known as Dezbaz as well as Shapur-Khast, is one of the most impressive castles in Iran. It is situated on the top of a large hill with the same name within the city of Khorramabad, the regional capital of Lorestan province. The Khorramabad River runs past the eastern and south-western side of the Falak-ol-Aflak hill providing the fortress with an element of natural protection. Today, the western and northern sides of the hill are bordered by the residential districts of Khorramabad. This gigantic structure was built during the Sassanid era (226–651). It has been known by a number of names since it was built over 1800 years ago. Recorded names have referred to it as Shapur-Khast or Sabr-Khast fortress, Dezbaz, Khorramabad castle, and ultimately the Falak ol-Aflak Castle. The foundations of the actual castle measure approximately 300 meters by 400 meters. The height of the entire structure, including the hill, reaches up to 40 meters above the surrounding area. This space is divided into four large halls, and their associated rooms and corridors. The rooms all surround two courtyards with the following measurements: the first courtyard measures 31×22.50 meters and the second 29x21 meters. . When originally built the castle used to have 12 towers, but only 8 remain standing today. The building's entrance is situated towards the north, within the body of the north-western tower.
Gerdab Sangi is located in Takhti Square in Khorramabad, Lorestan and is made of stones and plaster. It dates back to the Sassanid era (224-651 CE) and is a circular whirlpool built for the purpose of accurate and optimal distribution of water. Encircling several springs, the edifice sits near the prehistoric Qomri Cave. The construction was once used for rationing and distributing potable and agricultural water among local population and farmers. Its surrounding cylindrical stone wall has a height of 10 meters and a diameter of 18 meters. There are a few different-sized outlets in the wall for controlling the flow of water into a canal on the west of the structure. While originally there were 7 of such outlets, however, today only one is functional. This outlet measures 160 x 90 centimeters and opens and closes like a drawer. The water flowing out of this outlet, after a path of approximately 12 kilometers, would eventually make its way to a valley called Baba Abbas. In the vicinity of this valley, and the location of the ancient city of Shapurkhast, the remnants of an old mill, which was run using water from the springs, can be observed. Gerdab Sangi was registered on the National Heritage List in 1976.
Brick Minaret is a 900-year-old brick tower located beside the ancient city of Shapur khawst, south of Khorramabad, Lorestan province. It was built as a guidepost for caravans in ancient times. The minaret is about 30 meters tall with a circumference of 17.5 meters. Inside the tower there is a spiral staircase of 99 stairs.
In a stone-edged circle beside thundering Shari’ati St is an inscribed stone from around AD 1150, apparently setting out details of local grazing rights.
Shapoori Bridge is located in southern KhorramAbad. It has been used to connect the western part of Lorestan (Tarhan) to the east, and then on to Khoozestan province and Taysafun, the capital city of the Sassanian. The bridge is 312 meters long and 10.75 meters high. It has 28 arches and 27 piles. The area of each pile is 61 square meters, and the distance between the two piles is 7.5 meters. Five of its arches are intact; the others have been destroyed by natural factors. The arches of the bridge are made in the form of a wishbone. The piles and breakwaters of the bridge are in the form of six lateral lozenges made of stone. Probably the bridge also was used to distribute water. Materials of the bridge are river stones and stone chips in the arches and truncated stones in the piles. The bridge floor is paved in red block stones that have lost their square shape due to erosion. This attractive, huge bridge belongs to Sassanian era, and it is registered as number 1058 in the list of Iranian national monuments.
Lorestan University of Medical Sciences
Madanni Technical College
Open University of Khorram Abad
Lorestan University
Nasrollah Kasraian (born 1944) - Photographer
Masoud Rayegan (born 1954) - Actor
Houshang Azami lorestani (born 1936)
Vahid Mousaeian (born 1969) - Movie director
Mehdi Ghazi (born 1927)
Homayoun Behzadi (born 1942) - Football player and coach
Arash Kamalvand (born 1989) - Volleyball player
Arash Miresmaeili (born 1981) - judoka
Bijan Koushki (born 1979) - Football player
Gholamreza Mohammadi (born 1970) - Wrestler
Morteza Sepahvand (born 1979) - Amateur boxer
Reza Saghaei (born 1939) - Singer
Faraj Alipour born 1958) - Singer
List of World Heritage Sites in Iran
