Eluru is a city and district headquarters of West Godavari district in the Indian state of Andhra Pradesh. It is one of the 16 municipal corporations in the state, and the mandal headquarters of Eluru mandal in Eluru revenue division. As of 2011 Census of India, the city had a population of 218,018. The city is well known for its wool-pile carpets and hand woven products.
The city was alternately referred as in days of Buddhist kingdom of Vengi Helapuri. It was also known as Ellore.
History of Eluru dates back to 2nd century and has great prominence in the history of Andhra. Vengi near Eluru was capital of Andhra from 2nd century to 12th century, ruled by Salankayanas, Vishnukudinas, and Eastern Chalukyas. Vengi was capital of Andhra for many years than other city. Eluru was part of the Buddhist kingdom of Vengi.
Eastern Chalukyas Period (7th century to 12th century):
Eastern Chalukyas, or Chalukyas of Vengi were a South Indian dynasty whose kingdom was located in the present day Andhra Pradesh. Their capital was Vengi (Pedavegi and Denduluru, near Eluru) and their dynasty lasted for around 500 years from the 7th century until c. 1130 C.E. when the Vengi kingdom merged with the Chola empire. The Vengi kingdom was continued to be ruled by Eastern Chalukyan kings under the protection of the Chola empire until 1189 C.E., when the kingdom succumbed to the Hoysalas and the Yadavas. They had their capital originally at Vengi now (Pedavegi, Chinavegi and Denduluru) near Eluru of the West Godavari district end later changed to Rajamahendravaram (Rajamundry).
Kakathiya, Kalinga, Vijayanagara, and Golkonda's Period (13th Century to 16th Century):
Eluru was later captured by Kakatiyas and then became a part of the Kalinga Empire until 1471. Later it fell into the hands of the Gajapatis. In 1515 Srikrishnadevaraya captured it. After the fall of the Vijayanagara Kingdom, it was taken by the Sultan of Golkonda, Kutub Shah. Mohammedans built the fort at Eluru from the ruins of Vengi.
Modern History:
Eluru was formerly a military station, and the capital of the Northern Circars, a former division of British India's Madras Presidency. Salabat Jang, the son of the Nizam al Mulk, granted Northern Circurs to French East India Company and was necessarily transferred from the French to the British. After the British established control over South India, Eluru and surrounding areas were merged into the Madras Presidency.
Eluru was a part of Machilipatnam district after the division of Northern Circars. In 1859, it was included in the Godavari district and later it was made a part of the Krishna district. In 1925, it became the headquarters of the then newly West Godavari district.
Eluru is located at 16.7°N 81.1°E﻿ / 16.7; 81.1 and has an average elevation of 22 m (72 ft). It lies on the Eastern coastal plains. The Tammileru river, the Krishna and Godavari Canals passes through the city, before the river and the Eluru canal from Krishna empties into Kolleru Lake near the city.
Climate
The city experiences hot and humid climate due to its close proximity from the shore of Bay of Bengal. It has an average annual temperature of 28.2 °C (82.8 °F). May is the hottest and December is the coolest month of the year. July receives most precipitation and annually the city receives an average rainfall of 992 mm (39.1 in).
As of 2011 census of India, Eluru had population of 217,876 with 55,019 households. The Eluru urban agglomeration had a population of 283,648, of which 140,059 were male and 143,589 female.
Eluru Municipal Corporation is the civic body of Eluru. It was first constituted as a municipality on 1866. It was upgraded to municipal corporation on 9 April 2005 from selection grade municipality. It is spread over an of 14.50 km2 (5.60 sq mi) with 50 wards. The present Municipal commissioner of the city is Y.Sai Sreekanth and the Mayor is Shaik Noorjahan. In 2015, as per the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan of the Ministry of Urban Development, Eluru Municipal Corporation was ranked 249th in the country.
Eluru urban agglomeration is spread over an area of 23.85 km2 (9.21 sq mi) and its constituents include, Eluru municipal corporation, census towns of Sanivarapupeta, Satrampadu, Gavaravaram, Tangellamudi and partly out growths of Komadavole, Eluru (rural) villages.
Law and order in Eluru is maintained with the help of eight police stations, which includes one woman and one traffic police station. These are under the jurisdiction of Additional Judicial First Class Magistrate.
Eluru (Assembly constituency) is one of the constituencies for Andhra Pradesh Legislative Assembly. Badeti Kota Ramarao is the present MLA of the constituency from Telugu Desam Party. The constituency falls under Eluru (Lok Sabha constituency) which was won by Maganti Venkateswara Rao of Telugu Desam Party.
Tangellamudi, Sanivarapupeta and Lakshavarapupeta areas of the city are known for the wooden pile carpet industry. The eco-friendly carpets are made from wool and are exported to the countries like US, Australia, Germany and the UK. R.R.Pet, Powerpet, Eluru 1-Town area are the commercial places in Eluru.
Ambica Agarbathis company has its manufacturing unit in Eluru Industrial Estate.
Eluru is well connected to most of the cities and towns in Andhra Pradesh by road, rail and waterways. The bus, auto and railway are the main mode of transport services. While, Vijayawada Airport is the nearest airport for the air travel, which is located at a distance of 40 km from the city. APSRTC operates its bus services from Eluru Old and Eluru New bus stations to various parts of the State and also to other states.
The National Highway 5, a part of Asian Highway 45 passes through the city. State Highway 43 and State Highway 44 connects Eluru with Sathupalli and Jangareddygudem respectively.
Eluru is classified as an A–category station in the Vijayawada railway division of South Central Railway zone. Apart from the main station, other stations which serve the city include, Powerpet and Vatluru. All these stations are located on Howrah-Chennai main line.
National Waterway 4 (India) (NW-4) has been declared as an Indian National Waterway and is under development. The National Waterway 4 (India) (NW-4) runs along the Coromandal Coast through Kakinada, Eluru, Commanur, Buckingham Canal and also through part of Krishna and Godavari rivers in South India.
Buddha park is located in the city and is notable for its 74 ft (23 m) Buddha statue in the Abhaya posture, located in the heart of Gaja Vallivari Cheruvu tank which was used as drinking water source for Elephants in Ancient Era.
Kolleru lake is a largest fresh water lake, located at a distance of about 15 km from the city. The lake is known for attracting migratory birds from Northern Europe and Northern Asia during the months of October–March. Dwaraka Tirumala temple, Guntupalli Caves at distance of 40 km.
The ‘rajagopuram' of Sri Chennakesava Ramalingeswara Swamy temple at Sanivarapupeta on the city outskirts, reportedly built during the period of Eastern Chalukyas some 1,000 years ago. This five-storied structure with a height of 77 feet depicts 3000 structures of Ramayana, Mahabharata and Bhagavatham.
Cricket and Soccer are the most popular sports in the city. Presently the city 🏙 has four stadium out of which Indoor Stadium, ASR Stadium hosted for Ranji Trophy in 1977. Other popular stadiums are Helapuri grounds, C.R. Reddy Cricket stadium.
Many private residential junior colleges, high schools and technical institutions are present in Eluru. Thousands of students from various places in the district and state study in these institutions every year. They include ASRAMS, Sir C.R.Reddy Educational Institutions , Eluru College of Engineering and Technology.
The city residents are referred as Elurians. The lifestyle of the city has a mixture of both urban and rural with some cosmopolitan element. Eluru's residents wear both Indian style and Western style clothing. The common traditional clothing for women is a Saree and Dhoti for men. Antique museum is being set up in the city, that will preserve prehistoric tools, idols and other pre-historic elements found in the archaeological excavations nearby the city. The city of Eluru also have Cosmopolitan type of culture. It also contains a few night clubs.
Notable persons from the city are, Kommareddi Suryanarayana, Murali Mohan are from politics. People from film industry are Sekhar Kammula, Silk Smitha, L. V. Prasad. Duvvuri Subbarao is Indian Economist from the city.
List of cities in Andhra Pradesh
Kolleru Bird Sanctuary
