The 1997–98 Bundesliga was the 35th season of the Bundesliga, Germany's premier football league. It began on 1 August 1997 and ended on 9 May 1998. FC Bayern Munich were the defending champions.
Every team played two games against each other team, one at home and one away. Teams received three points for a win and one point for a draw. If two or more teams were tied on points, places were determined by goal difference and, if still tied, by goals scored. The team with the most points were crowned champions while the three teams with the least points were relegated to 2. Bundesliga.
Fortuna Düsseldorf, SC Freiburg and FC St. Pauli were relegated to the 2. Bundesliga after finishing in the last three places. They were replaced by 1. FC Kaiserslautern, VfL Wolfsburg and Hertha BSC.
Source: www.dfb.de
Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) goal difference; 3) number of goals scored1As domestic cup winners Bayern Munich had qualified for UEFA Champions League, their place in the Cup Winners' Cup was transferred to finalists Duisburg.(C) = Champion; (R) = Relegated; (P) = Promoted; (E) = Eliminated; (O) = Play-off winner; (A) = Advances to a further round.
Only applicable when the season is not finished:(Q) = Qualified to the phase of tournament indicated; (TQ) = Qualified to tournament, but not yet to the particular phase indicated; (RQ) = Qualified to the relegation tournament indicated; (DQ) = Disqualified from tournament.
Source: www.dfb.de
1 ^ The home team is listed in the left-hand column.Colours: Blue = home team win; Yellow = draw; Red = away team win.
22 goals
 Ulf Kirsten (Bayer 04 Leverkusen)
21 goals
 Olaf Marschall (1. FC Kaiserslautern)
14 goals
 Stéphane Chapuisat (Borussia Dortmund)
 Michael Preetz (Hertha BSC)
13 goals
 Fredi Bobic (VfB Stuttgart)
 Carsten Jancker (FC Bayern Munich)
 Jörgen Pettersson (Borussia Mönchengladbach)
 Toni Polster (1. FC Köln)
 Roy Präger (VfL Wolfsburg)
 Bernhard Winkler (TSV 1860 Munich)
1997–98 2. Fußball-Bundesliga
1997–98 DFB-Pokal
