Bakau is a town on the Atlantic coast of Gambia, west of Gambia's capital city of Banjul. It is known for its botanical gardens, its crocodile pool Bakau Kachikally and for the beaches at Cape Point. Bakau is the first major suburb outside Banjul and the most developed town in the Gambia. Close to Bakau and Banjul is Gambia's largest city, Serekunda.
Legend has it that Bakau grew up around the holy crocodile pool in Kachikally, the central district of Bakau. Bakau itself was a small village at the turn of the 19th century and grew in importance as it became a favourite place for private residences of colonial administrators, especially along the beautiful palm fringed beaches. Despite being a major town, the old village still exists and is run like any other in the Gambia, with an 'Alkali' (similar to 'Mayor') and divided into Kabilos. There exists a much smaller village within the old village called Bakau Wasulung Kunda, indicating the migrant origins of its inhabitants. As people began to move out of Banjul, government allocated residential areas quickly sprang around the old village, acquiring new names in the process. What were farms of the local population became well planned suburbs filled with bungalows, such as Fajara, New Town and Cape Point.
Tourism is the most important business activity in Bakau providing a lot of employment, as well as income for the municipal authority. At Cape Point there are a few hotels on a beach, arguably superior to the main Atlantic ocean beach, which is home to most of the hotels in the country. In town there are a few guest houses. There is also a major market along the main road famous for its fruit and vegetables. Most banks have branches there and several companies also maintain offices there.
Fishing is also another major business activity and there is a fishing port by the town beach, together with a wharf where a market attracts many visitors. One of the few ice plants in the country is located there.
Afrinat International Airlines had its head office in Bakau.
Bakau Primary School
NewTown Primary School
Marina International Scholl
West African International School
Gambia Methodist Academy
American International School
Glory Baptist Senior Secondary School
Bakau Upper Basic School
Presidents' Awards Scheme
Katchikally Nursery School
Bakau is perhaps the most developed settlement in the Gambia, with excellent communication facilities. Only the major roads are paved and the rate of electricity connection is almost universal. There are several hotels and a few guest houses. The only national Stadium, The Independence Stadium, is located here.
The national broadcaster, Radio Gambia, is located in Bakau at its Mile 7 studios. There is also a large military camp, a police barracks and a fire brigade.
Kachikally Museum and Crocodile Pool
Botanical Gardens
Fajara Hotel
Ocean bay Hotel
African Village Hotel
Cape Point Hotel
SunBeach Hotel
The Garden Guest House
Bakau basketball Academy
Swedish and Norwegian Councillor
Independence Stadium
Rock Heights
Njogu Demba-Nyrén, footballer
Kekuta Manneh, footballer
Amadou Sanyang, footballer
Sherif Bojang, Minister for information and communication
Lamin Jallow, footballer
Nagiru Staple Daffeh basketball player
Reuben Saul N'ying basketball player
