Nemuro (根室市, Nemuro-shi, Ainu: Ni mu oro) is a city and port located in Nemuro Subprefecture, Hokkaido, Japan. It is the capital city of Nemuro Subprefecture. Much of the city lies on the Nemuro Peninsula.
As of February 29, 2012, the city has an estimated population of 29,087, with 12,966 households, and a population density of 56.74 persons per km² (147.0 persons per sq. mi.). The total area is 512.63 km2 (197.93 sq mi).
Nemuro was developed by fisheries. In the early Meiji period, it was the largest city in eastern Hokkaido.
1900 Nemuro town was founded.
1906 Wada village was founded.
1915 Habomai village was founded.
1957 Nemuro town and Wada village was merged to form Nemuro city.
1959 Habomai village was merged into Nemuro city.
Nemuro, like most of Hokkaido, has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb) with mild to warm summers and cold snowy winters. Like the more northerly Kuril Islands, it has an extremely strong seasonal lag, with the highest temperatures in August and September and lowest in February, though it is not so gloomy as extremely foggy North Pacific islands like Simushir or the Aleutian Islands. Its peninsular location makes Nemuro very windy, especially during autumn and winter, with mean wind speeds as high as 22.7 kilometres per hour (14.1 mph) in November.
Nearby Nakashibetsu Airport serves Nemuro.
Hokkaido Railway Company – Nemuro Main Line
Stations in the city: Nemuro, Higashi-Nemuro, Hanasaki, Nishi-Wada, Kombumori, Ochiishi, Bettoga, Hattaushi, Attoko
National Route 44
National Route 243
Cape Nosappu
Cape Hanasaki, including "Kurumaishi", a car wheel shaped stone natural monument
Cape Ochiishi, a fishing port
The Ruins of Chashi in the Nemuro Peninsula
Roadside station Swan 44 Nemuro
Lake Furen
Shunkunitai Wild Bird Sanctuary
Habomai Fishing Port
Kotohira Shrine
Meiji Park
Ohashi Bridge
Onneto Lake
One local specialty of Nemuro is "escalope". This consists of tonkatsu (breaded deep-fried pork cutlets) over butter fried rice with a special demiglace sauce.
Nemuro is well known by the people of Hokkaido as the one of the best places to eat sushi because of the caught seafood. Nemuro also is the origin of two sushi restaurants in Hokkaido: Matsuriya and Hanamaru. Nemuro's seafood delicacies include their fresh Pacific saury, salmon, king crab, and shrimp.
Other delicacies in Nemuro include yakitori bento, Holland sanbei (waffle-like snack), soft serve ice cream, and monjayaki.
Hokkaido Nemuro High School
Hokkaido Nemuro Nishi High School
Nemuro is twinned with the following sister cities:
 Sitka, Alaska, United States
 Severo-Kurilsk, Russia
 Kurobe, Toyama, Japan
