The 1991–92 season of the European Cup football club tournament was won for the first time by Barcelona after extra time in the final against Sampdoria, the first victory in the tournament by a team from Spain since 1966. The winning goal was scored by Ronald Koeman with a free kick. This was the last tournament before the competition was re-branded as the UEFA Champions League. It was the first to have a group stage involving the eight second-round winners split into two groups, and the winner of each one met in the final.
This tournament also marked the first appearance of English clubs after a six-year absence resulting from the ban they received following the Heysel Stadium disaster in 1985. They would have returned one year earlier had any club other than Liverpool won the 1990 Football League championship, but Liverpool were unable to participate in the 1990–91 competition because they had been banned for an additional year beyond the five-year ban to which all English clubs had been subjected. Arsenal represented England this season and reached the second round.
The previous season's champions, Red Star Belgrade, did not have an opportunity to play at their own ground because of war in the former Yugoslavia, thereby reducing their chances of defending their title. Red Star themselves were eliminated in the group stage. It was also the final season in which the clubs from that country were able to participate in any European football competition. While the clubs from some other former Yugoslav republics were allowed to compete as early as in the 1993–94 season, due to UN embargo it was only in the 1997–98 season when the clubs from Federal Republic of Yugoslavia returned to the European football elite.
Note: Kaiserslautern and Hansa Rostock are champions of West Germany and East Germany in 1990–91 season respectively, both qualified for European Cup. As German reunification has occurred, all flags here show Germany instead of West/East Germany.
Brøndby won 4–2 on aggregate.
Apollon Limassol won 3–2 on aggregate.
IFK Göteborg 1–1 Flamurtari Vlorë on aggregate. IFK Göteborg won on away goals.
Kaiserslautern won 3–1 on aggregate.
Dynamo Kyiv won 4–0 on aggregate.
Marseille won 10–0 on aggregate.
Sampdoria won 7–1 on aggregate.
Fram Reykjavík 2–2 Panathinaikos on aggregate. Panathinaikos won on away goals.
Budapest Honvéd won 3–1 on aggregate.
Red Star Belgrade won 8–0 on aggregate.
Arsenal won 6–2 on aggregate.
PSV Eindhoven won 3–2 on aggregate.
Anderlecht won 4–1 on aggregate.
Barcelona won 3–1 on aggregate.
Sparta Prague 2–2 Rangers on aggregate. Sparta Prague won on away goals.
Benfica won 10–0 on aggregate.
Marseille 4–4 Sparta Prague on aggregate. Sparta Prague won on away goals.
Red Star Belgrade won 5–1 on aggregate.
Panathinaikos won 4–2 on aggregate.
Dynamo Kyiv won 2–1 on aggregate.
Anderlecht won 2–0 on aggregate.
Barcelona 3–3 Kaiserslautern on aggregate. Barcelona won on away goals.
Benfica won 4–2 on aggregate.
Sampdoria won 4–3 on aggregate.
Match was played in Budapest, Hungary since UEFA suspended Yugoslav teams from playing their home matches in Yugoslavia due to deteriorating security situation in the country caused by the ethnic incidents that eventually turned into Yugoslav Wars.
Match was played in Sofia, Bulgaria since UEFA suspended Yugoslav teams from playing their home matches in Yugoslavia due to deteriorating security situation in the country caused by the ethnic incidents that eventually turned into Yugoslav Wars.
Match was played in Sofia, Bulgaria since UEFA suspended Yugoslav teams from playing their home matches in Yugoslavia due to deteriorating security situation in the country caused by the ethnic incidents that eventually turned into Yugoslav Wars.
Note: All matches after dissolution of the Soviet Union on December 26 show Dynamo Kyiv with flag of Ukraine.
The top scorers from the 1991–92 European Cup (excluding qualifying rounds) are as follows:
