The 2010 French Open was a tennis tournament played on outdoor clay courts. It was the 109th edition of the French Open, and the second Grand Slam event of the year. It took place at the Stade Roland Garros in Paris, France, from 23 May through 6 June 2010.
Roger Federer and Svetlana Kuznetsova were the defending champions. Federer lost to Robin Söderling in the quarterfinals, while Kuznetsova lost to Maria Kirilenko in the third round.
The 2010 French Open also featured the return of four-time champion Justine Henin, who retired immediately before the 2008 French Open, where she was the 3-time defending champion.
In the Men's singles many of seeded players made it through led by 2009 finalist Robin Söderling, Mikhail Youzhny and Marin Čilić. While Jo-Wilfried Tsonga was pushed to the limit by German Daniel Brands as he came through 7–5 in the fifth. Tsonga was joined by compatriots Édouard Roger-Vasselin, Josselin Ouanna and Julien Benneteau who upset 23rd seed Ernests Gulbis 6–4, 6–2, 1–0 as Gulbis retired with a hamstring injury.
In the Women's side 6th seed and defending champion Svetlana Kuznetsova cruised through the first round with a 6–3, 6–1 victory of Sorana Cîrstea. She was joined by 2nd seed Venus Williams, Madrid champion Aravane Rezaï, Nadia Petrova, Flavia Pennetta, Maria Kirilenko and last years Semifinalist Dominika Cibulková. The day featured two upsets. Victoria Azarenka, hindered by an injury and only appeared in the event to have entered to claim the bonus prize money for ending the 2009 season in the top 10, became the first major casualty of the tournament as she was upset by Gisela Dulko. Rome champion María José Martínez Sánchez was also upset by Akgul Amanmuradova.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Ernests Gulbis
Women's Singles:  Victoria Azarenka,  María José Martínez Sánchez
Schedule of Play
In the Men's Singles World no. 1 and defending champion Roger Federer cruised past Peter Luczak with a 6–4, 6–1, 6–2 victory. He was joined by Indian Wells champion Ivan Ljubičić, Miami finalist Tomáš Berdych, Stanislas Wawrinka, John Isner and Thomaz Bellucci. While World no. 3 Novak Djokovic, last years semifinalist Fernando González, Gaël Monfils and Victor Hănescu all won in 4. While world no. 4 Andy Murray took on Richard Gasquet and won 4–6, 6–7, 6–4, 6–2, 6–1. 29th seed Spaniard Nicolás Almagro also needed five sets to defeat Robin Haase. The upsets of the day saw Spanish clay courters Feliciano López and Tommy Robredo both fall.
In the Women's draw 6 of the top 8 seeds were in action and all won. The field was led by World no. 1 Serena Williams who beat Stefanie Vögele 7–6, 6–2. She was joined by Caroline Wozniacki, Jelena Janković, Elena Dementieva, Samantha Stosur and Agnieszka Radwańska. Other seeds Li Na, Kateryna Bondarenko, Alisa Kleybanova and Lucie Šafářová who defeated Jelena Dokić all won in straight sets. While Francesca Schiavone and Alona Bondarenko come back from a set down to get to the second round.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Feliciano López,  Tommy Robredo
Schedule of Play
Day 3 of action was led by 4-time champion and 2nd seed Rafael Nadal who defeated Gianni Mina 6–2, 6–2, 6–2. Nadal was joined by fellow Spaniards 7th seed Fernando Verdasco, 16th seed Juan Carlos Ferrero, 9th seed David Ferrer and Pere Riba. Other seeds who went through were German Philipp Kohlschreiber, Austrian Jürgen Melzer and former world no. 1 Lleyton Hewitt. While 6th seed Andy Roddick who was playing his first match in clay of the season needed 5 sets to get past Jarkko Nieminen 6–2, 4–6, 4–6, 7–6, 6–3. Upsets were not avoided as two seeds fell in 4. As 18th seed Sam Querrey lost to comaptriot Robby Ginepri and 26th seed clay courter Juan Mónaco was upset by Grega Žemlja.
In the Women's Singles almost all seeds got through in straight sets led by Justine Henin who beat Tsvetana Pironkova 6–4, 6–3, in her 1st match at RG for 3 years. She was joined by unseeded compatriots Kirsten Flipkens and Yanina Wickmayer, as well as Russians Maria Sharapova, Vera Zvonareva and Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova. Other seeds Daniela Hantuchová, Shahar Pe'er, Zheng Jie and Frenchwoman Marion Bartoli all won. The second major upset of the tournaments came at the cost of 2 time finalist Dinara Safina who was upset by 39-year-old Kimiko Date-Krumm 3–6, 6–4, 7–5.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Juan Mónaco,  Sam Querrey
Women's Singles:  Dinara Safina
Schedule of Play
World no. 1 Roger Federer dispatched Colombian Alejandro Falla in straight sets. Other straight sets victors were Robin Söderling, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, Marin Čilić, Tomáš Berdych, Stanislas Wawrinka and Albert Montañés. While Mikhail Youzhny progressed in four after losing the first set tie-break. The only upset of the day was when Thiemo de Bakker defeated 32nd seed Guillermo García-López. The end of the day saw lots of matches being suspended and cancelled due to rain delays. One of those matches was between Frenchman Gaël Monfils and Italian Fabio Fognini which descended into chaos as they played on despite extreme darkness for 2 games, before finally coming off court a full 25 minutes after Murray and Chela's match did, at 5–5 in the 5th.
World no. 2 Venus Williams led the days games in the women's side with a 6–2, 6–4 victory over Arantxa Parra Santonja, she was joined by Caroline Wozniacki, Flavia Pennetta, Nadia Petrova, Alexandra Dulgheru and Maria Kirilenko who all won straight sets. While Dominika Cibulková and Aravane Rezaï scrambled to win in three. One of the stories of the day was with defending champion Russian Svetlana Kuznetsova against German Andrea Petkovic, who served for the match in the 2nd set, but the Russian survived 4–6, 7–5, 6–4. As with the Men's side several matches were cancelled.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Guillermo García-López
Women's Singles:  Lucie Šafářová
Men's Doubles:  Eric Butorac /  Rajeev Ram,  Robert Lindstedt /  Horia Tecău
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Gaël Monfils
Women's Singles:  Kateryna Bondarenko,  Agnieszka Radwańska,  Vera Zvonareva
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Marcos Baghdatis,  Fernando González,  John Isner,  Albert Montañés
Women's Singles:  Dominika Cibulková,  Alexandra Dulgheru,  Svetlana Kuznetsova,  Li Na,  Zheng Jie
Men's Doubles::  Simon Aspelin /  Paul Hanley,  Marcel Granollers /  Tommy Robredo
Women's Doubles:  Vera Dushevina /  Ekaterina Makarova
Mixed Doubles:  Yan Zi /  Mariusz Fyrstenberg
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  David Ferrer,  Juan Carlos Ferrero,  Victor Hănescu,  Lleyton Hewitt,  Philipp Kohlschreiber,  Ivan Ljubičić,  Andy Roddick
Women's Singles:  Marion Bartoli,  Alona Bondarenko,  Alisa Kleybanova,  Anastasia Pavlyuchenkova,  Aravane Rezaï,  Yanina Wickmayer
Men's Doubles::  Mahesh Bhupathi /  Max Mirnyi,  Bob Bryan /  Mike Bryan,  Mardy Fish /  Mark Knowles
Mixed Doubles:  Liezel Huber /  Mahesh Bhupathi,  Lisa Raymond /  Wesley Moodie,  Bethanie Mattek-Sands /  Mark Knowles
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Marin Čilić,  Andy Murray,  Jo-Wilfried Tsonga,  Stanislas Wawrinka
Women's Singles:  Maria Kirilenko,  Flavia Pennetta,  Maria Sharapova,  Venus Williams
Men's Doubles:  František Čermák /  Michal Mertiňák
Women's Doubles:  Iveta Benešová /  Barbora Záhlavová-Strýcová,  Cara Black /  Elena Vesnina,  Olga Govortsova /  Alla Kudryavtseva,  Andrea Hlaváčková /  Lucie Hradecká,  Alisa Kleybanova /  Francesca Schiavone,  Bethanie Mattek-Sands /  Yan Zi,  Lisa Raymond /  Rennae Stubbs
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Thomaz Bellucci,  Fernando Verdasco
Women's Singles:  Daniela Hantuchová,  Justine Henin,  Shahar Pe'er
Men's Doubles:  Julien Benneteau /  Michaël Llodra,
Women's Doubles:  Gisela Dulko /  Flavia Pennetta,  Maria Kirilenko /  Agnieszka Radwańska,  Nadia Petrova /  Samantha Stosur,  Chan Yung-jan /  Zheng Jie
Mixed Doubles:  Alisa Kleybanova /  Max Mirnyi
Schedule of Play
This day, Roger Federer lost his quarterfinals match against Robin Söderling, making it the first time since the 2004 French Open that Federer did not reach at least the semifinals of a Grand Slam tournament. It also meant that Federer lost his ATP men's single No. 1 ranking in tennis since Rafael Nadal won the 2010 French Open men's singles title. Also, since Nadal became the 2010 French Open men's singles champion, Federer was left only one week short of equalling Pete Sampras's record number of 286 weeks as the ATP No. 1 ranked men's singles player.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Roger Federer,  Mikhail Youzhny
Women's Singles:  Nadia Petrova,  Caroline Wozniacki
Men's Doubles:  Mariusz Fyrstenberg /  Marcin Matkowski,  Łukasz Kubot /  Oliver Marach
Mixed Doubles:  Cara Black /  Leander Paes
Schedule of Play
This day decided the last two of the four semifinalists in the women's singles. Since none of the four semifinalists (Samantha Stosur, Jelena Janković, Francesca Schiavone, and Elena Dementieva) had won any Grand Slam women's singles titles before, this meant Francesca Schiavone became a first-time women's singles Grand Slam champion in this tournament.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Nicolás Almagro,  Novak Djokovic
Women's Singles:  Serena Williams
Women's Doubles:  Liezel Huber /  Anabel Medina Garrigues,  Nuria Llagostera Vives /  María José Martínez Sánchez
Mixed Doubles:  Nuria Llagostera Vives /  Oliver Marach
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Women's Singles:  Elena Dementieva,  Jelena Janković
Men's Doubles:  Wesley Moodie /  Dick Norman,  Julian Knowle /  Andy Ram
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Tomáš Berdych,  Jürgen Melzer
Women's Doubles:  Květa Peschke /  Katarina Srebotnik
Schedule of Play
Seeds out:
Women's Singles:  Samantha Stosur
Men's Doubles:  Lukáš Dlouhý /  Leander Paes
Schedule of Play
Rafael Nadal reclaimed the No. 1 men's singles ATP ranking, leaving Roger Federer only one week short of equalling Pete Sampras's record number of 286 weeks as the ATP No. 1 ranked men's singles player. This win is also the first time since the French Open 2004 that Roger Federer was knocked out by a player who hasn't won a grand slam tournament.
Seeds out:
Men's Singles:  Robin Söderling
Schedule of Play
 Rafael Nadal defeated  Robin Söderling, 6–4, 6–2, 6–4
It was Nadal's 4th title of this year and the 40th of his career. It was his fifth win in six years at Roland Garros and his seventh Grand Slam men's singles victory.
Nadal reclaimed the No. 1 ATP ranking with this victory.
Nadal's victory also completed a historic 'Clay Slam' for Nadal, seeing him become the first person in history to win all Masters 1000 tournaments on clay (Monte Carlo, Rome and Madrid), as well as the French Open, in the same calendar year.
This was the second time Nadal had won the French Open without dropping a set.
 Francesca Schiavone defeated  Samantha Stosur, 6–4, 7–6(7–2)
Both Schiavone and Stosur were first-time Grand Slam finalists.
It was Schiavone's second title of the year, the fourth of her career, and her first major title.
 Daniel Nestor /  Nenad Zimonjić defeated  Lukáš Dlouhý /  Leander Paes, 7–5, 6–2
 Serena Williams /  Venus Williams defeated  Květa Peschke /  Katarina Srebotnik, 6–2, 6–3
The Williams sisters won their 12th Grand Slam doubles title and 2nd at the French Open. With this, they hold all Grand Slam doubles titles simultaneously.
Also, they have won the career women's doubles golden slam for the second time in their respective careers.
 Katarina Srebotnik /  Nenad Zimonjić defeated  Yaroslava Shvedova /  Julian Knowle, 4–6, 7–6(7–5), [11–9]
Srebotnik and Zimonjić both won their fourth Grand Slam mixed doubles title.
 Agustín Velotti defeated  Andrea Collarini, 6–4, 7–5
 Elina Svitolina defeated  Ons Jabeur, 6–2, 7–5
Svitolina won her first Junior Grand Slam title.
 Duilio Beretta /  Roberto Quiroz defeated  Facundo Argüello /  Agustín Velotti, 6–3, 6–2
Beretta and Quiroz win their first junior Grand Slam title in doubles.
 Tímea Babos /  Sloane Stephens defeated  Lara Arruabarrena Vecino /  María Teresa Torró Flor, 6–2, 6–3
Babos and Stephens win their first junior Grand Slam title in doubles.
 Yevgeny Kafelnikov /  Andriy Medvedev defeated  Goran Ivanišević /  Michael Stich, 6–1, 6–1
 John McEnroe /  Andrés Gómez defeated  Mansour Bahrami /  Henri Leconte, 6–1, 6–1
 Martina Navratilova /  Jana Novotná defeated  Iva Majoli /  Nathalie Tauziat, 6–4, 6–2
 Shingo Kunieda defeated  Stefan Olsson, 6–4, 6–0
Kunieda won his tenth wheelchair Grand Slam singles title, and his fourth at the French Open.
 Esther Vergeer defeated  Sharon Walraven, 6–0, 6–0
Vergeer won her 15th wheelchair Grand Slam singles title, and her fourth at the French Open.
 Stéphane Houdet /  Shingo Kunieda defeated  Robin Ammerlaan /  Stefan Olsson, 6–0, 5–7, [10–8]
Houdet wins his fourth wheelchair Grand Slam doubles title and the first at French Open, and Kunieda wins his ninth wheelchair Grand Slam doubles title and second at French.
 Daniela Di Toro /  Aniek van Koot defeated  Esther Vergeer /  Sharon Walraven, 3–6, 6–3, [10–4]
Di Toro and van Koot win their first wheelchair Grand Slam title in doubles.
The following are the seeded players and notable players who withdrew from the event. Rankings are as of 17 May 2010
Below are the lists of the wildcard awardees entering in the main draws.
 Stéphanie Cohen-Aloro /  Thierry Ascione
 Julie Coin /  Nicolas Mahut
 Mathilde Johansson /  Sébastien de Chaunac
 Kristina Mladenovic /  Alexandre Sidorenko
 Pauline Parmentier /  Marc Gicquel
 Aurélie Védy /  Michaël Llodra
All prize money is in Euros (€); doubles prize money is distributed per pair.
 Australia: Nine, Fox Sports
 Canada: TSN, RDS
 Brazil: ESPN, ESPN Brasil
 United States: NBC, ESPN2, Tennis Channel
 Europe: Eurosport
Domestic rights have also been sold to the following broadcasters, who may only cover the later rounds or not show any coverage at all, depending on the progress of domestic players:
 Austria: ORF
 Belgium: RTBF, VRT
 Bosnia and Herzegovina: BHRT
 Croatia: HRT
 Cyprus: CyBC
 Denmark: TV2 Sport
 France: France Télévisions, Orange Sport
 Finland: MTV3, FST5
 Germany: ARD, ZDF
 Greece: ERT, ANT1, Mega Channel
 Ireland: TG4
 Montenegro: RTCG
 The Netherlands: NOS
 Romania: TVR
 Russia: Eurosport, Russia 2
 Serbia: RTS
 Slovenia: RTV Slovenija
 Spain: TVE
 Sweden: SVT
 Switzerland: SRG-SSR
 Turkey: TRT
 United Kingdom: BBC
 People's Republic of China: CCTV
 Hong Kong: Now Sports
 India: ESPN STAR Sports
 Japan: WOWOW
 Macao: TDM
 Malaysia: Astro
 Morocco: SNRT
 New Zealand: Sky Sport
 Thailand: TV7, True Sport
Sub-Saharan Africa: Supersport
Middle East and North Africa: Al Jazeera Sports
Latin America: ESPN Latin America
 The Philippines: Balls, Studio 23
 Singapore: Starhub
Rafael Nadal's victory marked for the 5th consecutive year the No.2 seed has gone on to win the tournament. (Rafael Nadal in 2006,2007,2008 and 2010 and Roger Federer in 2009.)
