2005 in sports describes the year's events in world sport.
Alpine Skiing World Cup
Men's overall season champion: Bode Miller (US)
Women's overall season champion: Anja Pärson (Sweden)
College football Bowl Championship Series (2004 season):
January 1 – Rose Bowl – Texas Longhorns 38–37 Michigan Wolverines
January 4 – Orange Bowl – USC Trojans 55–19 Oklahoma Sooners: USC wins the NCAA Division I-A Football National Championship
National Football League –
February 6 – Super Bowl XXXIX – New England Patriots 24–21 Philadelphia Eagles at Jacksonville, Florida
May 18 – UEFA Cup Final – CSKA Moscow became the first Russian club to win a major European club competition, defeating Sporting Lisbon 3–1 at Sporting's home field in Lisbon.
May 25 – UEFA Champions League Final – Liverpool defeated A.C. Milan 3–2 on penalties after a 3–3 draw in Istanbul to win Europe's top prize for the 5th time.
August 31 – Boca Juniors (Argentina) won the Recopa Sudamericana 2005 4–3 on aggregate over Once Caldas (Colombia). (First leg in Buenos Aires 3–1, second leg in Manizales 1–2)
December 11 – Opening game of the first FIFA World Club Championship, a six team tournament replacing the former Intercontinental Cup. In the final one week later Brazilian team São Paulo won the competition narrowly beating UEFA Champions Liverpool 1–0.
December 18 – Boca Juniors defeated UNAM Pumas on penalties after the second leg game for the Copa Sudamericana 2005.
December 19 – Ronaldinho (Brazil, for male footballer) and Birgit Prinz (Germany, for female footballer) were elected FIFA World Player of the Year.
Australian Football League
The Sydney Swans win the 109th AFL Premiership, defeating West Coast Eagles 8.10 (58) to 7.12 (54), the club's first premiership in 72 years
Brownlow Medal awarded to Ben Cousins, captain of the West Coast Eagles
Leigh Matthews Trophy also awarded to Cousins
Coleman Medal awarded to Fraser Gehrig of St Kilda
See also Australian Football League season 2005
2005 Australian Football International Cup won by New Zealand
June 14 – Men's 100 metres – Asafa Powell of Jamaica sets a new world record of 9.77 at the Athens Olympic Stadium.
June 19 – European Cup
Men's overall standings – Germany
Women's overall standings – Russia
August – World Championships held in Helsinki
IAAF Golden League – Russian triple jumper Tatyana Lebedeva is the sole winner of the US$1 million jackpot divided among all athletes who win their event at each of six designated meets.
December 13 – The Court of Arbitration for Sport bans American Tim Montgomery for two years in a case stemming from his involvement with the controversial "sports nutrition" center BALCO. Although Montgomery never tested positive for drugs, CAS found the circumstantial evidence against him overwhelming. It also struck all his results since 2001 from the records, including a then world-record time of 9.78.
October 22 – 2005 Japan Series – The Chiba Lotte Marines sweep the Hanshin Tigers 4 games to 0.
October 26 – 2005 MLB World Series – The Chicago White Sox sweep the Houston Astros 4 games to 0 to win the World Series for the first time since 1917.
NBA Finals – San Antonio Spurs win their third NBA title in the past seven years, defeating the Detroit Pistons in the first seven-game NBA Finals in eleven years.
Men's Division I – North Carolina defeats Illinois 75–70 in the Championship Game. It is Tar Heels coach Roy Williams's first national title.
Women's Division I – Baylor defeats Michigan State 84–62 in the final. It is the first Women's National Title game in several years to not involve either Tennessee or UConn. Baylor coach Kim Mulkey-Robertson becomes the first woman to win NCAA Division I basketball titles as a player and coach.
Euroleague – Maccabi Tel Aviv successfully defends the Euroleague title, defeating TAU Cerámica of Spain 90–78 in the final.
Chinese Basketball Association finals – defending champions Guangdong Southern Tigers defeat the Jiangsu Dragons 3 games to 2 in the best-of-five Chinese Basketball Association finals.
National Basketball League (Australia) – Sydney Kings defeated the Wollongong Hawks 3–0 in a best-of-five finals series.
February 20 - Chris Barnes wins the 62nd US Open
April 3 - Patrick Allen wins the PBA Denny's World Championship
April 10 - Steve Jaros wins the PBA Dexter Tournament of Champions
Patrick Allen is named the Player of the Year for 2004-2005
November 20 - Mike Scroggins wins the USBC Masters
May 7 – Diego Corrales defeats José Luis Castillo by 10th round knockout, for the WBO-WBC lightweight title unification. Both men were exchanging a brutal amount of punishment throughout the fight, before a dramatic tenth round in which Corrales scored a TKO after getting knocked down twice. The fight was highly regarded as one of the greatest of all-time and won Ring Magazine fight of the year.
July 16 – Jermain Taylor, 2000 US Olympic Boxing bronze medalist, defeats Bernard Hopkins for the undisputed Middleweight Title ending Hopkins' 10 year title reign. Hopkins made 20 successful title defenses before losing to Taylor, the current record in the middleweight division, Carlos Monzón is second with 14 successful defenses.
13 to November 20 – World Amateur Boxing Championships held in Mianyang, People's Republic of China
November 27 – the Edmonton Eskimos win the 93rd Grey Cup game, defeating the Montreal Alouettes 38–35 at BC Place Stadium in Vancouver.
January 10 – ICC World XI (344 for 8) beat the ACC Asian XI (232) by 112 runs to win the first of two scheduled one-day internationals for the World Cricket Tsunami Appeal; the second was never played. It is the first time an ODI has been played that has not been between two cricketing nations.
January 10 – Bangladesh beat Zimbabwe by 226 runs to record their first ever Test match victory.
July 2 – England and Australia tie the deciding NatWest Series trophy match at Lord's Cricket Ground.
August 11 – Shane Warne becomes the first bowler to take 600 Test wickets.
September 12 – England win The Ashes.
Road bicycle racing
Giro d'Italia – Maglia rosa (Overall winner): Paolo Savoldelli (Italy, Discovery Channel Team)
Tour de France won by Lance Armstrong, his record-setting seventh consecutive title.
Cyclo-cross
UCI Cyclo-cross World Championships
Men's Competition – Sven Nys
Women's Competition – Hanka Kupfernagel
Men's Champions Trophy: Australia
Men's Champions Challenge: Argentina
Women's Champions Trophy: Netherlands
Women's Champions Challenge: New Zealand
World Figure Skating Championships
Men's champion: Stéphane Lambiel, Switzerland
Ladies' champion: Irina Slutskaya, Russia
Pair skating champions: Tatiana Totmianina and Maxim Marinin, Russia
Ice dancing champions: Tatiana Navka and Roman Kostomarov, Russia
April 16 – The annual congress of the Gaelic Athletic Association votes to open up Croke Park and allow soccer and rugby to be played there under certain circumstances. It is expected that this will pave the way for the Republic of Ireland national football team and the Irish national rugby union team to use Croke Park during the redevelopment of their home ground, Lansdowne Road.
Camogie
All-Ireland Camogie Champion: Cork
National Camogie League: Galway
Gaelic football
All-Ireland Senior Football Championship – Tyrone 1–16 died Kerry 2–10
National Football League – Armagh 1–21 died Wexford 1–14
Tommy Murphy Cup – Tipperary 3–10 died Wexford 0–15
Ladies' Gaelic football
All-Ireland Senior Football Champion: Cork
National Football League: Cork
Hurling
All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship – Cork 1–21 died Galway 1–16
Liam McCarthy Cup –
Christy Ring Cup – Westmeath 1–23 died Down 2–18
Nicky Rackard Cup – London 5–8 died Louth 1–5
National Hurling League –
World Gliding Championships (Women's), Klix, Germany
15-metre Class Winner: Mette Pedersen, Denmark; Glider: Alexander Schleicher ASW 27B
Standard Class Winner: Jana Veprekova, Czech Republic; Glider: Rolladen-Schneider LS8-b
Club Class Winner: Hana Vokrinkova, Czech Republic; Glider: Schempp-Hirth Standard Cirrus
World Gliding Championships (Junior), Husbands Bosworth, United Kingdom
Standard Class Winner: Mark Parker, Great Britain; Glider: Rolladen-Schneider LS8
Club Class Winner: Christoph Nacke, Germany; Glider: Rolladen-Schneider LS1
Men's professional
Major Championships
Masters Tournament – Tiger Woods defeated fellow American Chris DiMarco at the first playoff hole to claim his 4th Masters title and his 9th major.
U.S. Open – Michael Campbell
British Open – Tiger Woods
PGA Championship – Phil Mickelson
PGA Tour money leader – Tiger Woods won $10,628,024
Men's amateur
British Amateur – Brian McElhinney
U.S. Amateur – Edoardo Molinari
European Amateur – Marius Thorp
Women's professional
Kraft Nabisco Championship – Annika Sörenstam won her eighth major
LPGA Championship – Annika Sörenstam
U.S. Women's Open – Birdie Kim
Women's British Open – Jeong Jang
LPGA Tour money leader – Annika Sörenstam won $2,588,240
2005 World Men's Handball Championship: Spain
Steeplechases
Cheltenham Gold Cup – Kicking King
Grand National – Hedgehunter
Flat races
Australia – Melbourne Cup won by Makybe Diva for the third time in succession
Canada – Queen's Plate won by Wild Desert
Dubai – Dubai World Cup won by Roses in May
France – Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe won by Hurricane Run
Ireland – Irish Derby Stakes won by Hurricane Run
Japan
Deep Impact won the Satsuki Sho (Japanese 2,000 Guineas), Tokyo Yushun (Japanese Derby), and Kikuka Sho (Japanese St. Leger) to become the first horse since 1994 to win the Japanese Triple Crown.
Japan Cup won by Alkaased
English Triple Crown Races:
2,000 Guineas Stakes – Footstepsinthesand
Epsom Derby – Motivator
St. Leger Stakes – Scorpion
United States Triple Crown Races:
Kentucky Derby – Giacomo
Preakness Stakes – Afleet Alex
Belmont Stakes – Afleet Alex
Breeders' Cup World Thoroughbred Championships:
Breeders' Cup Classic – Saint Liam
Breeders' Cup Distaff – Pleasant Home
Breeders' Cup Filly & Mare Turf – Intercontinental
Breeders' Cup Juvenile – Stevie Wonderboy
Breeders' Cup Juvenile Fillies – Folklore
Breeders' Cup Mile – Artie Schiller
Breeders' Cup Sprint – Silver Train
Breeders' Cup Turf – Shirocco
February 16 – the 2004–05 NHL season was canceled by league commissioner Gary Bettman. This was the first time that a North American professional sports league had to cancel a season due to a labor dispute.
May 29 – Memorial Cup – London Knights defeat Rimouski Océanic 4–0 to win the Memorial Cup.
June 1 – Kelly Cup – Trenton Titans defeat Florida Everblades 4 games to 2 to win the Kelly Cup.
June 10 – Calder Cup – Philadelphia Phantoms defeat Chicago Wolves 4 games to 0 to win the Calder Cup.
The Philadelphia Flyers top two minor league affiliates, the ECHL Trenton Titans and the AHL Philadelphia Phantoms, both win their respective championship series.
July 22 – the 2004–05 NHL lockout ends when a new collective bargaining agreement between the NHL and NHLPA is reached.
Major League Lacrosse (USA)
Baltimore Bayhawks defeated Long Island Lizards 15–9 to win the Steinfeld Cup.
MLL announces four expansion teams to start play in the 2006 season and create a Western Conference: Chicago, Denver, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
National Lacrosse League
The Toronto Rock defeat the Arizona Sting to win the Champion's Cup.
Les Bartley, former coach and GM of the Toronto Rock, dies later that week.
Gary Gait, of the Colorado Mammoth, retires along with his twin brother Paul Gait ending an era of lacrosse.
NCAA Division I (US Collegiate)
Johns Hopkins University obtains the No. 1 seed in the post-season tournament, and wins the championship in Philadelphia on May 30 to go unbeaten.
Northwestern University wins their first Division I NCAA Women's Lacrosse Championship.
European lacrosse
November 10 – Austrian Lacrosse Association (ÖLAXV) is founded.
The following is a list of major noteworthy MMA events during 2005 in chronological order.
Formula One –
Fernando Alonso clinches the World Drivers' Championship.
Renault F1 clinches the Formula One constructors' title.
World Rally Championship won by Sébastien Loeb for the Citroën Total World Rally Team.
Stock car racing (NASCAR):
Daytona 500 – won by Jeff Gordon in the # 24 DuPont Chevrolet.
Coca-Cola 600 – won by Jimmie Johnson in the # 48 Lowe's Chevrolet.
Brickyard 400 – won by Tony Stewart in the # 20 Home Depot Chevrolet.
2005 NASCAR Nextel Cup Champion – Tony Stewart.
24 hours of Le Mans
The overall and LMP1 class victores were won by JJ Lehto, Marco Werner, and Tom Kristensen in the # 3 Champion Racing Audi R8. Kristensen becomes the only driver to have won 7 overall victories at the Le Mans 24 Hours.
Australian V8 Supercar
2005 V8 Supercar champion – Russell Ingall.
Champ Car World Series
2005 Champ Car World Series champion – Sébastien Bourdais.
Indy Racing League –
Indianapolis 500 – won by Dan Wheldon in the Andretti Green Racing # 26 Dallara/Honda.
Danica Patrick becomes the first woman to lead a lap in the Indianapolis 500. She wins the Indy 500 Rookie of the Year award after finishing fourth, the highest finishing position by a woman in the race's history.
2005 IRL IndyCar Series champion – Dan Wheldon.
6th High Speed Telegraphy World Championship held in Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia.
February 4 at Elland Road, Leeds – 2005 World Club Challenge match is won by the Leeds Rhinos who defeated the Bulldogs 39–32 before 37,208
April 22 at Suncorp Stadium, Brisbane – in the 2005 ANZAC Day Test, Australia defeat New Zealand 32–16 before 40,317
July 5 at Suncorp Stadium, Brisbane – 2005 State of Origin is won by New South Wales in the third and deciding match of the series against Queensland before 52,436
August 27 at Millennium Stadium, Cardiff – 2005 Challenge Cup tournament won by Hull with a 25–24 win over Leeds Rhinos before 74,213
October 2 at Telstra Stadium, Sydney – 2005 NRL season culminates in the Wests Tigers 30–16 win over the North Queensland Cowboys in the Grand Final before 82,453
October 15 at Old Trafford, Manchester – Super League X culminates in Bradford Bulls 15–6 win over Leeds Rhinos in the Grand Final before 65,728
November 26 at Elland Road, Leeds – 2005 Rugby League Tri-Nations tournament culminates in New Zealand's 24–0 win over Australia in the final before 26,534
110th Six Nations Championship series is won by Wales who complete the Grand Slam
2005 British and Irish Lions tour to New Zealand – The Lions suffer a 3–0 whitewash to the All Blacks, as well as losing to the New Zealand Māori side. It was the first time in 22 years that a Lions side had lost every Test match on tour.
Tri Nations – New Zealand wins for the 6th time. The All Blacks also picked up the Bledisloe Cup in the process.
Heineken Cup – Toulouse defeat Stade Français 18–12 in the final.
Super 12 – The Crusaders defeat the Waratahs 35–25 in the final
Zurich Premiership (England) – Leicester Tigers win the league, Wasps win the playoffs
Celtic League – Ospreys
Top 16 (France) – Biarritz defeat Stade Français 37–34 in the final
National Provincial Championship (New Zealand): Auckland defeat Otago 39–11 in the final
Currie Cup (South Africa) – Cheetahs defeat Blue Bulls 29–25 in the final
In the November Tests, the All Blacks (New Zealand) score a "Grand Slam" by defeating all four Home Nations (Wales, Ireland, England, Scotland) while on tour. This is the first such Grand Slam for a Southern Hemisphere team since Australia did so in 1984, and the first for the All Blacks since 1978.
World Championship – Shaun Murphy beats Matthew Stevens 18–16
Asashōryū Akinori wins all six basho (tournament) in 2005 (a new record) and wins eighty-four bouts (out of ninety) setting a new record for victories in a single year. His seventh straight basho championship is also a new record.
11th World LC Championships held in Montreal
23rd Summer Universiade held in Izmir, Turkey
9th European SC Championships held in Trieste, Italy
Germany wins the most medals (13); Germany and Poland win the most gold medals (5)
World Championships held in Madrid, Spain
Australian Open
Men's Final: Marat Safin defeats Lleyton Hewitt
Women's Final: Serena Williams defeats Lindsay Davenport
French Open
Men's Final: Rafael Nadal defeats Mariano Puerta
Women's Final: Justine Henin-Hardenne defeats Mary Pierce
Wimbledon Championships
Men's Final: Roger Federer defeats Andy Roddick
Ladies' Final: Venus Williams defeats Lindsay Davenport
US Open
Men's Final: Roger Federer defeats Andre Agassi
Women's Final: Kim Clijsters defeats Mary Pierce
ITU World Championships held in Gamagōri, Japan
Men's World League: Brazil
Women's World Grand Prix: Brazil
2005 FINA Men's World Water Polo Championship: Yugoslavia
2005 FINA Men's Water Polo World League: Yugoslavia
2005 FINA Women's World Water Polo Championship: Hungary
2005 FINA Women's Water Polo World League: Greece
World Championships held in Doha, Qatar
European Championships held in Sofia, Bulgaria
Fourth East Asian Games held in Macau, China
20th Summer Deaflympics held in Melbourne, Australia
23rd Southeast Asian Games held in Manila, Philippines
First Asian Indoor Games held in Bangkok, Thailand
Seventh World Games held in Duisburg, Germany
15th Mediterranean Games held in Almería, Spain
XXIII Summer Universiade held in Izmir, Turkey
Russia tops the medal table with a total number of 65 medals, including 26 golds.
XXII Winter Universiade held in Innsbruck, Austria
Austria tops the medal table with a total number of 21 medals, including 10 golds.
Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year – Lance Armstrong, Cycling
Associated Press Female Athlete of the Year – Annika Sörenstam, LPGA golf
