The Supercoppa Italiana (Italian Super Cup) is a pre-season football competition held the week before the season begins in Italy every year. It is contested by the winners of the Serie A and the Coppa Italia in the previous season, as a curtain raiser to the new season.
It is usually played at the home of the Serie A champions. In 1993 and 2003, it was held in the United States cities of Washington, D.C., and East Rutherford, New Jersey (New York market). The 2002 final was played in the Libyan capital Tripoli. Three of the past five games have been played in the Bird's Nest of Beijing, China.
If the same team wins both Serie A and Coppa Italia, then the Supercoppa is contested by the Serie A winner and the Coppa Italia runner-up. This has happened so far in 1995 and 2015 (Juventus), 2000 (Lazio), 2006 and 2010 (Internazionale).
Juventus hold the record for winning the cup the most times, winning it seven times since the competition began in 1988.
The 27th edition was played on 22 December 2014, featuring Juventus, the Serie A winners, and Napoli, Coppa Italia winners. The game was tentatively scheduled to be played on 24 August 2014, but due Napoli's participation in the Champions League Play-off Round, the team asked that the game be rescheduled during Serie A's winter break. The score was level at 1–1 after 90 minutes, and 2–2 after extra time. In the penalty shoot-out, with Napoli shooting first, both teams failed to score on their first attempts, but were then perfect through five and then six penalty shots, with both Álvaro Morata and Leonardo Bonucci of Juventus scoring must-goals. Napoli missed shots in both round seven and eight, but both Giorgio Chiellini and Roberto Pereyra failed to clinch the cup for Juventus. In round nine, Kalidou Koulibaly scored for Napoli, while Simone Padoin's shot was saved, giving Napoli its second title. Juventus was making a record tenth appearance. The two teams met in the Supercoppa Italiana for the third time, with Napoli now having a 2–1 edge. Coincidentally, Napoli's three total appearances have all been against Juventus.
*Finished as Coppa Italia runners-up
Five times the Coppa Italia runners-up has participated with record 0–5.
 Alessandro Del Piero (3)
 Samuel Eto'o (3)
 Andriy Shevchenko (3)
 Carlos Tevez (3)
