Guy Forget (French pronunciation: ​[ɡi fɔʁʒɛ], born 4 January 1965) is a French former professional tennis player. During his career, he helped France win the Davis Cup in both 1991 and 1996. Since retiring as a player, he has served as France's Davis Cup team captain.
Forget first came to the tennis world's attention as an outstanding junior player who won the French Open junior title in 1982. He turned professional later that year.
His breakthrough year on the professional tour was 1986 when he made it to the fourth round of Roland Garros, his best grand slam at that point, and won his first top-level singles title in Toulouse, and was also part of the French team which won the World Team Cup. Forget also won six doubles titles in 1986, reaching his career-high doubles ranking of World Number 3 in August that year, finishing in the runner-up spot with partner Jakob Hlasek at the 1990 ATP Tour World Championships tournament.
In 1987 Forget and Yannick Noah finished runners-up in the men's doubles at the French Open. In 1990, Forget partnered Jakob Hlasek to win the ATP Tour World Championships doubles title.
1991 was the most memorable year of Forget's career. He won six singles titles that year, the biggest coming at the ATP Masters Series events in Cincinnati and Paris. In both finals, he defeated Pete Sampras. He reached his career-high singles ranking of World Number 4 in March that year.
Forget was a member of the French team which won the 1991 Davis Cup. In the final, France faced the United States. Forget teamed up with Henri Leconte to win the doubles rubber, and then won the decisive singles rubber against Pete Sampras as France shocked the heavily favoured US team to win 3–1.
1996 was another notable year in Forget's career. Partnering Jakob Hlasek, he again finished runner-up in the men's doubles event at the French Open. He also won what proved to be his last career singles title in Marseille. For a second time, he was on a French team which won the Davis Cup. In the final, he teamed-up with Guillaume Raoux to win a critical doubles rubber, as France defeated Sweden 3–2.
Forget played for France's Davis Cup team for 12 years, compiling a 38–11 record.
Forget retired from the professional tour in 1997. During his career, he won a total of 11 top-level singles titles and 28 doubles titles. His career prize-money earnings totalled US$5,669,934.
Since retiring as a player, Forget has served as France's Davis Cup team captain. Also he has served as France's Fed Cup team since 1999, his best result was France's performance in 2003 (This squad included Mary Pierce, Amélie Mauresmo, Émilie Loit & Stéphanie Cohen-Aloro) when they defeated USA in the final. However, he resigned the year after (2004) to focus on his Davis Cup duties and the French team then lost to Russia's in final (when Marion Bartoli & Émilie Loit lost to Anastasia Myskina & Vera Zvonareva in last one deciding double match).
A = did not attend tournament
NH = tournament not held
A = did not attend tournament
NH = tournament not held
