Jordyn Marie Wieber (born July 12, 1995) is a retired American artistic gymnast. She was a member of the U.S. Women's Gymnastics team, dubbed the Fierce Five by the media, at the 2012 Summer Olympics, where she won a gold medal in the team competition. She was also a member of the gold-winning American team at the 2011 World Championships, where she also won the individual all-around.
Wieber was born on July 12, 1995, in DeWitt, Michigan, the daughter of Rita (née Reifsnyder) Wieber, who is an emergency room nurse and exercise physiologist, and David Wieber, who is a director at a health-care subsidiary. She is the third oldest of four children, and her family attends the St. Jude Catholic Church in Dewitt. Her maternal grandmother is of Lebanese descent.
Wieber started gymnastics at a young age. "I was probably two or three. My parents noticed that I had unusually bigger muscles than a typical little kid, so they put me in gymnastics. A little fun class where I could run around and play and stuff and just have fun. Then I actually stopped for a little bit to do dance class. When I was four I went back [to gymnastics] and that’s kind of when I started getting really into it." She later enrolled with John Geddert, who handpicked her to his Silverstars program, and by age 10, she had qualified to Level 10 in the Junior Olympic program, and then qualified for international elite a year later in 2006.
In February, Wieber competed at the American Cup in Chicago, Illinois. She won the all-around competition with a score of 60.200.
In August, an injury prevented her from attending the Visa Championships.
In April, Wieber competed at the 2010 Pacific Rim Gymnastics Championships in Melbourne, Australia. She helped the American team place first. Individually, she won the all-around competition with a score of 59.550.
In July, Wieber competed at the Covergirl Classic in Chicago, Illinois. She won the all-around competition with a score of 59.950.
In August, Wieber attended the Visa Championships but sprained her ankle on the balance beam and withdrew from competition.
In March, Wieber participated in her first senior elite competition at the American Cup in Jacksonville, Florida, where she filled in for an injured athlete. She won the all-around competition with a score of 59.899. "It felt great to win my second American Cup title," Wieber said. "It's such an honor."
Later in March, Wieber competed at the City of Jesolo Trophy in Jesolo, Italy. She placed second behind teammate McKayla Maroney in the all-around competition with a score of 57.700. The Americans also won the team title.
In July, Wieber competed at the Covergirl Classic in Chicago, Illinois. She placed first on uneven bars with a score of 15.200 and tied for first on balance beam with Olympic medalist Alicia Sacramone. Both girls scored 15.200.
In August, Wieber competed at the Visa Championships in Saint Paul, Minnesota. After the first day, she said, "I wasn't too nervous, but I just had to get a few jitters out. I definitely think floor and vault were really strong. I'm definitely going to focus on bars and beam on Saturday." She won the all-around competition with a two-day combined score of 121.300. In the event finals, she placed first on uneven bars scoring 29.750, third on balance beam scoring 29.900 and first on floor scoring 29.900. Wieber said, "It feels really good. Just how aggressive and confident I was, I want to put into my training."
In October, Wieber competed at the 2011 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships in Tokyo, Japan. She contributed an all-around score of 60.398 towards the American team's first-place finish. She also won the all-around final with a score of 59.382. "I feel amazing," Wieber said. "I was so surprised. I wasn't expecting to come out on top but I am really happy and glad that I did enough on that floor routine to make it. To come in here and achieve one of my goals that I have had since I was a little kid is so exciting. I am very happy to have this gold medal around my neck." In event finals, she placed fourth on uneven bars scoring 14.500, third on balance beam scoring 15.133, and sixth on floor scoring 14.700.
Wieber was a finalist for the James E. Sullivan Award, which is given annually by the Amateur Athletic Union.
In January, Wieber appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show.
At the beginning of March, Wieber competed at the American Cup in New York City, New York. She won the all-around competition with a score of 61.320. "It feels amazing to win my third American Cup," said Wieber. "I'm really excited to get started with the Olympic year."
Later in March, Wieber competed at the 2012 Pacific Rim Gymnastics Championships in Everett, Washington. She helped the American team place first. Individually, she won the all-around competition with a score of 61.050. Wieber said, "I was pretty happy that I hit four solid events, because it's been a few meets since I've (done that)." In the event finals, she placed sixth on balance beam scoring 13.700 and first on floor scoring 15.125.
In May, Wieber competed at the Secret U.S. Classic in Chicago, Illinois. She placed 8th on uneven bars with a score of 14.250 and first on balance beam with a score of 15.000.
In June, Wieber competed at the Visa Championships in St. Louis, Missouri. She won the all-around competition with a two-day combined score of 121.900. In the event finals, she placed fifth on uneven bars scoring 30.100, fifth on balance beam scoring 29.750, and second on floor scoring 30.500. "I'm just happy to be here, especially in the Olympic year," Wieber said. "I feel like all my hard work is paying off."
In early July, Wieber competed at the Olympic Trials in San Jose, California. After the first day, Wieber said, "Today went pretty well. My main goal was to go out there and do confident routines. The crowd was awesome – I love seeing the stands full and hearing them cheer before I go up for a routine." She placed second in the all-around competition with a two-day combined score of 123.350. In the event finals, she placed fourth on uneven bars scoring 30.700, third on balance beam scoring 29.950, and second on floor scoring 31.000. Wieber was chosen as a member of the American team for the 2012 Summer Olympics. "It feels amazing to be an Olympian," Wieber said. "This is definitely the best day of my life and knowing that all of my hard work has paid off is amazing. I'm just so proud of each and every girl who competed here today."
Wieber was featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated with the rest of the USA Women's Olympic Gymnastics team on the July 18, 2012, issue of Olympic Preview. This marked the first time an entire Olympic gymnastics team had been featured on the cover of "Sports Illustrated".
Wieber was ranked eighth in the FIG World Rankings for the CII All Around competition. She had a score of 50 points, from her participation at the American Cup in March. This was the only appearance in a FIG World Cup competition for Jordyn
At the end of July, Wieber competed at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, United Kingdom. In qualifications, she placed fourth overall with a score of 60.032 behind teammates Aly Raisman and Gabby Douglas, meaning that she would not advance to the all-around final due to the rule limiting participating countries to having a maximum of two competitors in the all-around final. Wieber would still compete in the team final where the American team qualified first and the floor final where she qualified sixth with a score of 14.666. She said, "It was hard because of course I wanted that spot, but I also wanted Aly to do her best also for the team and for herself. It's always been a dream of mine to compete in the all around at the Olympics and shoot for that gold medal. I'm really proud of Aly and Gabby both and I'm happy that they both made it to the all around and I'm glad that I'll be able to help the team out in team finals." Her coach, John Geddert said, "I'm basically devastated for her. She has trained her entire life for this day and to have it turn out anything less than she deserves is going to be devastating. She has waited her entire career for this. She is happy for her teammates and disappointed that she doesn't get to move on."
In the team final, Wieber contributed scores of 15.933 on vault, 14.666 on uneven bars, and 15.000 on floor toward the American team's first-place finish. Wieber is considered to be a confident and steady "lead off" gymnast. She "set the table" for the rest of the American team during finals, posting consistent scores. Wieber said, "I was pretty disappointed, but I had to put it together mentally, especially for this team. A team gold medal was also officially a goal of mine, and I had to pull myself together and move on and be stronger mentally for the team. The feeling was incredible. To have this gold medal around your neck, it's really an indescribable feeling." The team was nicknamed the "Fierce Five".
In the floor final, Wieber placed seventh with a score of 14.500. She said, "I knew that it was going to have to take a lot of details in the routine with all the landings. I did step out of bounds, and I knew at that point that it wouldn't be enough. I tried to still fight through and finish the routine strong."
After the Olympics, Wieber announced that she had been competing with a stress fracture in her right leg caused by a heel injury. She said, "Once I got out on the floor, adrenaline took over and I didn't really feel it that much." She was forced to limit her training to protect the injury. "That affected me a little bit," Wieber said. "I know that eventually affected my performance. In the end, I have no regrets. I know injuries come with the sport and you have to deal with it and I'm glad I fought through and finished out to the end."
In 2013, Wieber signed a sponsorship agreement with Adidas Gymnastics. In the fall, she enrolled as a freshman at UCLA, where she studies psychology. She is also a Team Manager for their gymnastics team.
On March 6, 2015, Wieber announced her retirement from elite gymnastics. Wieber was the first member of the Fierce Five to retire from elite gymnastics.
The highlights of Wieber's routines are her power, mental toughness, and difficult skills and combinations. Her difficulty scores are from the 2009–2012 Code of Points.
2011
2011 World Championships (Tokyo)
Vault:
Difficulty: 6.5 (maximum score 16.500)
Two and a half twisting Yurchenko Amanar (roundoff, backhandspring entry, two and a half twisting layout).
Uneven Bars:
Difficulty: 6.3 (maximum score 16.300)
Glide Kip cast to handstand (KCHS) with hop grip change (B) + Forward Clear Hip Circle (Weiler) (D) + Weiler 1/2 (D) + Toe-on circle Shaposhnikova (Maloney) (D) + Clear Hip Circle 1/1 (D) + Overshoot to handstand (D) + Stalder shoot up to high bar (Ray) (C); KCHS (B) + Toe-on circle to handstand 1/1 (Hoefnagel) (D) + Straddled Tkatchev (D); KCHS (B) + giant + giant + Double Layout Dismount (D).
Balance Beam:
Difficulty: 6.4 (maximum score 16.400)
Side Split Mount (A); Front Aerial Walkover (D) + one-armed Flip Flop step-out (B) + Layout Step-Out (C); Switch Split Leap (C) + Back Pike (C); Split Jump (A) + Sissone (A); Tucked Side Somi (D); Full Turn with leg at horizontal (C) + Full Turn (A); Johnson 1/2 (D); Aerial Cartwheel (D); Back Tuck 1/1 (F) + Flip Flop step-out (B); Flip Flop step-out (B) + Flip Flop two-feet (B) + 2.5 Twist Dismount (D).
Floor Exercise:
Difficulty: 6.0 (maximum score 16.000)
Roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Double Tuck 2/1 (Silivas) (G); Roundoff + Back Layout 3/2 (C) out to roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Triple Twist (E); Triple Turn with leg below horizontal (C); Switch Split Leap (B) + Split Leap 1/1 (C); Roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Back Layout 5/2 (D) + Front Layout (B); Johnson 1/2 (C); Roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Double Pike Dismount (D).
2012
2012 Summer Olympic Games (London)
Vault:
Difficulty: 6.5 (maximum score 16.500)
Two and a half twisting Yurchenko Amanar (roundoff, backhandspring entry, two and a half twisting layout).
Uneven Bars:
Difficulty: 6.4 (maximum score 16.400)
Glide Kip cast to handstand (KCHS) with hop grip change (B) + Forward Clear Hip Circle (Weiler) (D) + Weiler 1/2 (D) + Toe-on circle Shaposhnikova (Maloney) (D) + Clear Hip Circle 1/1 (D) + Overshoot to handstand (D) + Stalder shoot up to high bar (Ray) (C); KCHS (B) + Toe-on circle to handstand 1/1 (Hoefnagel) (D) + Straddled Tkatchev (D); KCHS (B) + giant + giant + Full Twisting Double Layout Dismount (E).
Balance Beam:
Difficulty: 6.6 (maximum score 16.600)
Side Split Mount (A); Front Aerial Walkover (D) + one-armed Flip Flop step-out (B) + Layout Step-Out (C); Front Handspring (B) + Back Tuck 1/1 (F) + Flip Flop step-out (B); Switch Split Leap (C) + Back Pike (C); Aerial Cartwheel (D) + Tucked Side Somi (D); Split Jump (A) + Sissone (A); Switch Leap 1/4 (Johnson) (C); Full Turn with leg at horizontal (C) + Full Turn (A); Flip Flop step-out (B) + Flip Flop two-feet (B) + 2.5 Twist Dismount (D).
Floor Exercise:
Difficulty: 6.2 (maximum score 16.200)
Roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Double Tuck 2/1 (Silivas) (G); Roundoff + Back Layout 3/2 (C) out to roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Triple Twist (E) + Stag Jump (A): Triple Turn with leg below horizontal (C); Switch Split Leap (B) + Johnson 1/2 (C); Roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Back Layout 5/2 (D) + Split Jump (A); Split Leap 3/2 (D); Front Aerial Walkover (A); Roundoff + Flip Flop two-feet + Double Pike Dismount (D).
