Survivor Series (2010) was a professional wrestling pay-per-view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) and presented by WowWee's Paper Jamz, that took place on November 21, 2010, at the American Airlines Arena in Miami, Florida. It was the 24th annual Survivor Series event and eight matches took place.
The Survivor Series chronology was originally set to end with the 2009 event when during a press conference held on February 11, 2010, WWE chairman, Vince McMahon announced that WWE would drop the Survivor Series name and rebrand the event. However, following public outcry and several different fan petitions the name was later reinstated and in June 2010, WWE started to release tickets for a 2010 event.
Survivor Series featured professional wrestling matches involving different wrestlers from pre-existing scripted feuds, plots, and storylines that were played out on World Wrestling Entertainment's (WWE) television programs. Wrestlers portrayed villains or heroes as they followed a series of events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.
The main rivalry from Raw involved The Nexus leader Wade Barrett against champion Randy Orton for his WWE Championship with Nexus member John Cena as the Special Guest Referee. At Hell in a Cell, two months earlier, Cena lost a match against Barrett, forcing Cena to join Nexus. His main priority as a member of Nexus was to help Barrett secure the WWE Championship from Randy Orton, having Cena help Barrett during a Battle Royale to name a number one contender and forcing Cena to help him during his match against Orton at Bragging Rights. At that match, if Barrett did not win the match, he would have Cena fired for breaking their stipulation from their match at Hell in a Cell. However, Cena attacked Barrett during the match giving him the win via disqualification, though Orton still retained the title. The next day on Raw, when Cena won a match against Orton, Barrett named Cena the special guest referee for their match at Survivor Series. Once again, if Barrett did not win the title, then he would have Cena fired, but as an incentive for Cena to perform his duty, if Barrett did win the title, Barrett would relieve Cena from his obligation to Nexus. On the November 8th episode of Raw, the General Manager made the stipulation that the match can only be won via pinfall or submission; in addition, the other members of The Nexus were banned from ringside.
The main rivalry from SmackDown involved the World Heavyweight Champion Kane against Edge for the World Heavyweight Championship. After defeating his half-brother The Undertaker last month at Bragging Rights after their three-month war, Alberto Del Rio, Rey Mysterio and Edge all interfered in Kane's "funeral" for the Undertaker. Afterwards, all three competed in a match against each other for a number one contender spot. At the end of the match, Edge came out victorious and thus became the number one contender against Kane at Survivor Series.
Prior to Survivor Series coming on the air, R-Truth (with Eve Torres) pinned Zack Ryder in a dark match.
The first match that took place on the pay-per-view was Daniel Bryan facing Ted DiBiase (with Maryse) for the United States Championship. DiBiase dominated in the beginning utilizing various veteran moves. He then threw Bryan to the outside with a suplex off the apron. Back in the ring, DiBiase attempted his Dream Street finisher, but Bryan countered and locked in his signature arm trap crossface, dubbed the LeBell Lock, and made DiBiase submit.
In the second match, John Morrison facing Sheamus in a singles match. The two opponents exchanged punches and kicks, until Sheamus missed his signature Bicycle Kick, which landed his legs between the top rope. Morrison capitalized, hitting his signature springboard roundhouse kick (dubbed the Flying Chuck) on Sheamus. With Sheamus in a seated position, Morrison hit his signature running knee to Sheamus, and pinned him for the win.
For the third match was Dolph Ziggler (with Vickie Guerrero) for the Intercontinental Championship against Kaval. Kaval dominated at first with a series of kicks and even almost put Ziggler away with a diving Moonsault. Ziggler came back after nailing his signature leg drop bulldog, yet only got a two count. Kaval then attempted an inverted roll-up pin, but Ziggler countered by grabbing his tights (which is illegal) and won and retained his WWE Intercontinental Championship.
In the fourth match, Team Mysterio (Rey Mysterio, Kofi Kingston, Chris Masters, Big Show, and Montel Vontavious Porter) faced Team Del Rio (Alberto Del Rio, Tyler Reks, Drew McIntyre, Jack Swagger, and Cody Rhodes) in a Traditional Survivor Series Elimination Tag Team match. The match started with rivals Mysterio and Del Rio. Team Del Rio utilized quick tags and later tagged in Rhodes, who countered Mysterio's springboard attempt and turned it into a springboard roundhouse kick to Mysterio's skull dubbed the Beautiful Disaster. Rhodes later tagged in Del Rio, who dominated Mysterio. Mysterio came back after an inverted hurricanrana, and later tagged in Porter. Porter dominated Del Rio, and early in the match hit Del Rio with the Player's Boot. Team Mysterio used quick tags to neutralize Del Rio. Del Rio then tagged in McIntyre who pinned MVP with the aid of Del Rio. Masters was tagged in, but was put in Team DR's corner, where they used quick tags to tire him out with Del Rio using his Cross Armbreaker to eliminate him. Soon after Del Rio was knocked out by Big Show after slapping his head. Rhodes was soon eliminated after being knocked out by Big Show's punch as well. Kingston then eliminated Reks only to tap out to Swagger's ankle lock. Big Show and Mysterio then used quick tags and combination moves to take out McIntyre and Swagger.
In the fifth match, Natalya defeated Lay-Cool (Layla and Michelle McCool) in a two-on-one handicap match for the Divas Championship, winning the title for the first time. After the match, Beth Phoenix returned to WWE and rescued Natayla from the ambush of Lay-Cool
For the sixth match, Kane and Edge for the World Heavyweight Championship fought to a draw which means the World Heavyweight Champion is still Kane. Edge reacted by putting Kane in a wheelchair and pushing him through the fan barrier.
In the seventh match, the The Nexus (Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater) (with David Otunga, Michael McGillicutty, and Husky Harris) retained their Tag Team Championship defeating Santino Marella and Vladimir Kozlov, after The Nexus interfered in the match.
For the eighth and final match, Randy Orton retained his WWE Championship against Wade Barrett in a free or fired Pinfall-and-submissions-only singles match with John Cena as a special referee. Cena pushed Barrett into a RKO, and because of the stipulations of the match, John Cena was fired. Cena thanked Michael Cole and the fans on his way to the back to close the show.
The next night, on Raw at the Amway Center in Orlando, Florida, Cena thanked the WWE Universe and was given an ovation by other wrestlers backstage as he exited the arena. Barrett taunted him on his way out. The following night on Raw, Wade Barrett demanded a rematch against Randy Orton for the WWE Championship. During the match, John Cena (who had been fired the previous night) attacked Barrett, costing him the match. Immediately after this match, The Miz cashed in his Money in the Bank briefcase and defeated Orton to become the new WWE Champion. At WWE TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs 2010, The Miz successfully defended his title against Randy Orton in a Tables match.
With The Nexus having assaulted security, John Cena was free to enter the arena and attack any and all members of The Nexus. Eventually a mutiny formed within The Nexus, and they threatened to kick Wade Barrett out unless he rehired John Cena. Along with that, the rehiring of Cena was met under the condition that Barrett would face him in a Chairs match at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs. Cena would go on to win the match at the pay-per-view.
On the following episode of SmackDown, Kane granted Edge a rematch for the championship in return that his storyline father Paul Bearer would be released from being hostage by Edge. Edge took the opportunity; however, Bearer would still be held hostage. Before the pay-per-view, Kane pushed what he thought was another dummy off of a ladder, only to discover it was actually Paul Bearer himself. At TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs 2010, Kane would have to defend his title in a fatal four-way Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match against Edge, along with Rey Mysterio and Alberto Del Rio. Mysterio and Del Rio, who were in a feud of their own, were added to the match courtesy of SmackDown GM Theodore Long. At TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs, Edge would go on to win the World Heavyweight Championship.
Natalya and Beth Phoenix's feud with LayCool led to a tag team tables match at TLC, which Natalya and Phoenix won.
After Survivor Series, the 2010 King of the Ring tournament took place, with John Morrison and Sheamus making their way to the finals. Sheamus would win, becoming the 2010 King of the Ring; he and Morrison would wrestle at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs in a ladder match to determine the #1 contender for the WWE Championship, which Morrison would win.
Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater would lose the WWE Tag Team Championship to Santino Marella and Vladimir Kozlov. A rematch was granted at TLC: Tables, Ladders, & Chairs, but Marella and Kozlov would retain the titles.
The event was generally well received by critics. The Sun called the main event a "measured affair" and not a "classic encounter". They also praised the Morrison vs. Sheamus match saying it "featured the biggest surprise of the night" with Morrison defeating Sheamus. However, they said the match didn't live up to their expectations. They called the Divas Championship match a gem. Overall, The Sun gave the event an 8 out of 10, calling it a "pretty good show".
The pay-per-view drew 244,000 buys, up from the 235,000 that the previous year's event received.
Survivor Series elimination tag team match
List of WWE pay-per-view events
