The 2010 EHF European Men's Handball Championship (9th tournament) was held in Austria from 19–31 January, in the cities of Vienna, Graz, Innsbruck, Linz and Wiener Neustadt.
5 Austrian cities have been selected to host the 2010 Championship. The venues in Linz, Graz and Wiener Neustadt were only used during the preliminary round. The fourth venue to be used in this round was located in Innsbruck, and was also one of the two venues in the main round. The other being Wiener Stadthalle in Vienna, which was the only venue to be used in the final round.
Qualification matches were played in 2008 and in 2009. For the first time, in qualification round all teams are included, except host Austria and defending champion Denmark. Teams were divided in 7 groups and top two teams from each group qualifyd to European Championship.
The draw for the final tournament took place 19:00 CET on 24 June 2009 at the Liechtenstein Museum in Vienna.
In the following tables:
Pld = total games played
W = total games won
D = total games drawn (tied)
L = total games lost
GF = total goals scored (goals for)
GA = total goals conceded (goals against)
GD = goal difference (GF−GA)
Pts = total points accumulated
The teams placed first, second and third (shaded in green) qualified to the main round.
Venue: Stadthalle, Graz
All times are Central European Time (UTC+1)
Venue: Intersport Arena, Linz
All times are Central European Time (UTC+1)
Venue: Olympiaworld, Innsbruck
All times are Central European Time (UTC+1)
Venue: Arena Nova, Wiener Neustadt
All times are Central European Time (UTC+1)
Venue: Stadthalle, Vienna
Venue: Olympiaworld, Innsbruck
Venue: Stadthalle, Vienna
Goalkeeper:  Sławomir Szmal (POL)
Left Wing:  Manuel Štrlek (CRO)
Left Back:  Filip Jicha (CZE)
Playmaker:  Nikola Karabatic (FRA)
Pivot:  Igor Vori (CRO)
Right Back:  Ólafur Stefánsson (ISL)
Right Wing:  Luc Abalo (FRA)
Best Defence Player :  Jakov Gojun (CRO)
Most Valuable Player:  Filip Jícha (CZE)
Source: ehf-euro.com
Source: EHF
Source: EHF
2010 European Women's Handball Championship
