Eugenie "Genie" Bouchard (born February 25, 1994) is a Canadian professional tennis player who is currently ranked no. 40 in the world. At the 2014 Wimbledon Championships, Bouchard became the first Canadian to reach the finals of a Grand Slam in singles, finishing runner-up to Petra Kvitová. She also reached the semifinals of the 2014 Australian Open and 2014 French Open, and won the 2012 Wimbledon girls' title. Following the end of the 2013 WTA Tour, she was named WTA Newcomer of the Year. The next year, Bouchard received the WTA Most Improved Player award for the 2014 season.
Eugenie Bouchard was born to Michel Bouchard, an investment banker, and Julie Leclair in Montreal. She has a fraternal twin sister, Beatrice, who is six minutes older. She also has two younger siblings, sister Charlotte (born 1995) and brother William (born 1999). She and her twin sister are named after Prince Andrew's daughters. Beatrice is named after Princess Beatrice of York, while Eugenie is named after Princess Eugenie of York. Her sister Charlotte is named after Charlotte Casiraghi, the daughter of Monagesque Royal Caroline, Princess of Hanover and Italian Stefano Casiraghi. William is named after Prince William, Duke of Cambridge. She is fluent in both French and English.
Bouchard started playing tennis at the age of five and she is a member of Tennis Canada's National Training Centre in Montreal. She attended The Study school in Westmount. At age 12, she moved to Florida with her mother to be coached by Nick Saviano, where she met one of her best childhood friends, tennis player Laura Robson. From that time on, she was nicknamed "the chosen one" by her siblings. Her father established a limited partnership called "Tennis Mania" to support Eugenie's career. He and two investors contributed money to the partnership in exchange for 10 percent of Bouchard's future earnings when she would become a professional tennis player. In August 2013, a court ruled that the partnership has no legal claims as Eugenie, then a 9-year-old, could not have reasonably agreed to giving away parts of her future earnings. Her father had argued that the money he had put into the partnership before Eugenie turned pro was a business loss which would have meant a tax benefit for himself.
At 15, Bouchard returned to Montreal for training. A proficient student in mathematics and science, she once considered a career as a physician. Her favourite tennis player is Roger Federer, whom she met in 2012 at the Wimbledon Ball. She described talking with Federer as a highlight of her life. For the 2013 WTA Tour, Bouchard enlisted Nathalie Tauziat to coach and travel with her part-time. Under Tauziat, Bouchard transformed her defensive, retrieving tactics from junior level into a game of aggression. Tauziat was let go after the season and Saviano committed to a more present role alongside Bouchard, for the 2014 WTA Tour. During the 2013 off-season she appeared on CTV's The Social, as well as CTV Montreal as a guest weather anchor.
Bouchard was in a relationship with British Tennis player Luke Bambridge until 2013.
In 2014, Bouchard started dating Hockey player Jordan Caron. They have ended the relationship in 2015.
In 2005, Bouchard participated at the tournament Open Super 12 in Auray, France. She captured the ITF singles and doubles titles in Costa Rica and also the All Canadian ITF singles title in Burlington in 2008. In 2009 and at only 15, she won the Canadian under-18 indoor championship in Toronto. At this event, Bouchard overpowered fellow Quebecer Marianne Jodoin to become, at 15 years and a month, one of the youngest winners of the indoor event. Later that year, she won her first professional main draw match at Caserta, Italy, defeating no. 798 Frederica Grazioso. Also in 2009, she won the Pan American Closed ITF Championships.
At the Australian Open, she lost in the semifinals of the singles junior event against fifth seed Mónica Puig. A week later, she won her first professional title at the ITF $25,000 Burnie International, where she defeated fellow 16-year-old qualifier Zheng Saisai in the final. She won her second professional title in April at the ITF $10,000 in Šibenik, Croatia. She defeated qualifier Jessica Ginier in the final. She missed the French Open due to an injury. At Wimbledon, Bouchard lost in the quarterfinals of the singles junior event to no. 3 seed Irina Khromacheva but won the doubles junior event with her partner Grace Min. She also reached a week later her first professional doubles final with Megan Moulton-Levy at the $50,000 ITF tournament in Waterloo, where she lost. At the end of July, she beat the 114th ranked player Alison Riske at the Citi Open in College Park. It was her first WTA main draw win. With that win, she had the chance to meet no. 2 seed Nadia Petrova in the second round, but lost the match.
Bouchard reached the semifinals of the junior Australian Open for the second straight year, but lost to Yulia Putintseva. Bouchard won her first professional doubles title at the $50,000 ITF tournament in Dothan with partner Jessica Pegula. She defeated fellow Canadians Sharon Fichman and Marie-Ève Pelletier in the final. In May, Bouchard won her third professional singles title at the $10,000 ITF Challenger in Båstad with a win over Katharina Lehnert. She won the next week her second straight $10,000 ITF title in Båstad, when she defeated Milana Špremo in the final. Bouchard won the singles title at the junior Wimbledon with a victory over third seed Elina Svitolina. She became the first Canadian ever, junior or pro, to win a Grand Slam in singles. She also won the doubles title for the second straight year, this time with American Taylor Townsend, after beating Belinda Bencic and Ana Konjuh in the final.
At the end of July, Bouchard won her second $25,000 ITF tournament and fifth singles title of her career at the Challenger in Granby. She defeated fellow Canadian and defending champion Stéphanie Dubois in the final. She played a week later at the Citi Open where she was awarded a wildcard for the main draw. Bouchard made it to the first WTA quarterfinal of her career, where she was defeated by Sloane Stephens. At the Rogers Cup, she upset former world No. 11 Shahar Pe'er in the first round. She then lost in the next round to 2011 French Open champion Li Na. Bouchard reached her first $50,000 ITF final at the Challenger in Saguenay, but lost to Madison Keys. The next week, she won her first 50K at the ITF Challenger in Toronto. She reached the doubles final as well. At her last tournament of the season, Bouchard lost to Jacqueline Cako and Natalie Pluskota in the doubles final of the 75K in Phoenix.
At the start of the season, Bouchard attempted to qualify for the main draw at the Apia International Sydney, but lost to Storm Sanders in the first round of the qualifiers. She played the qualifiers for the Australian Open and was eliminated by Daria Gavrilova in the second round. Bouchard played in the main draw of the Copa Bionaire in Cali, Colombia. She beat Laura Thorpe in the opening round but lost to Russian Alexandra Panova in the next round. Her next tournament was the Copa Colsanitas where she had to play the qualifying rounds again. She beat Richèl Hogenkamp in the opening round but lost to Arantxa Parra Santonja in the second, preventing her from making the main draw. Bouchard played in the main draw of the Abierto Mexicano Telcel in Acapulco, Mexico. She played Eva Birnerová in the first round and won. She next faced defending champion and top seed Sara Errani, but was defeated. She received a wild card entry to the Sony Open Tennis in Miami and beat Shahar Pe'er in her opening match and was defeated in the second round by world No. 2 Maria Sharapova.
Bouchard then competed at the Family Circle Cup where she successfully qualified for the main draw, and drew fellow qualifier, Nastassja Burnett which she won in straight sets. She also defeated world No. 42 Laura Robson in three sets in the second round, her first top-50 win. She then had one of the biggest wins of her career when she defeated the former US Open champion Samantha Stosur to book a spot in the quarterfinals of the Premier tournament. It was the first top-10 victory of her young career. Although she lost to Jelena Janković, the quarterfinal appearance assured her a spot in the top-100 for the first time. Bouchard went on to play a French Open warm up tournament, the Internationaux de Strasbourg, where she had one of her most impressive runs on the WTA Tour to date. She made it to the semifinals by defeating Sílvia Soler Espinosa, Camila Giorgi and Anna Tatishvili all in straight sets, but lost to Alizé Cornet. Bouchard made her first Grand Slam main draw appearance at the French Open, where she defeated Tsvetana Pironkova in straight sets. Her next opponent was the defending champion and world No. 2 Maria Sharapova, who defeated her.
At Wimbledon, Bouchard defeated qualifier Galina Voskoboeva in her opening match in three tough sets. In the second round, she had one of the biggest wins of her career when she beat world No. 12 and former no. 1 Ana Ivanovic on Centre Court in straight sets. She was eliminated in the third round by Carla Suárez Navarro. At the beginning of August, Bouchard reached the doubles final at the tournament in Washington, D.C. which was the first WTA final of her career. She was defeated, with partner Taylor Townsend, by Shuko Aoyama and Vera Dushevina in the final. The next week, she made it to the second round for the second straight year at the Rogers Cup and was ultimately defeated by defending champion Petra Kvitová. At the last WTA Premier 5 before the US Open, Bouchard reached the second round of the Western & Southern Open as a qualifier, but lost in three sets to world No. 1 Serena Williams. At the US Open, she was stopped by world No. 9 Angelique Kerber in the second round. Bouchard made it to the second WTA semifinal of her career at the Challenge Bell in mid-September, but was eliminated by Lucie Šafářová.
At the Premier 5 Toray Pan Pacific Open, Bouchard had a remarkable run. She defeated Mónica Puig in the first round and the no. 9 seed Sloane Stephens in three tight sets in the second. In the third round, she beat the former world No. 1 and 6th seed Jelena Janković, her second win over a member of the top-10, in straight sets to reach her first WTA Premier 5 quarterfinal and fourth WTA quarterfinal of her career. She was defeated by Venus Williams in the next round in over three hours of play. The next week, Bouchard lost to Sloane Stephens in the second round of the WTA Premier Mandatory China Open. At the beginning of October at the HP Open, she made it to the first WTA singles final of her career and became the first Canadian to reach a WTA singles final since Rebecca Marino in 2011 in Memphis. She ultimately lost to Samantha Stosur in the final. At the BGL Luxembourg Open, the last tournament of her season, Bouchard was defeated by Andrea Petkovic in the first round. Bouchard was named the WTA Newcomer of the Year after her breakthrough season, the first Canadian since Carling Bassett-Seguso in 1983 to win the award.
Bouchard started the new season at the Hopman Cup, where she represented Canada with Milos Raonic, followed by a first-round exit at the Apia International Sydney to Bethanie Mattek-Sands. The next week, Bouchard won her opening match at the Australian Open over wildcard Tang Haochen, followed by wins over Virginie Razzano, Lauren Davis, and Casey Dellacqua to advance to the quarterfinals. In the quarterfinals, Bouchard defeated Ana Ivanovic and advanced to the semifinals. She was eliminated by world no. 4 Li Na in the semifinals, but guaranteed herself a spot in the world's top 20 for the first time. Two weeks later, she won both of her singles matches in the Fed Cup World Group II first round against Serbia, helping Canada reach the World Group playoffs for the first time since 2004.
At the BNP Paribas Open, Bouchard defeated Peng Shuai in the second round and scored her third win over a member of the top 10 with a victory over Sara Errani in the third round. Her run was stopped by world No. 7 Simona Halep in the fourth round. Bouchard reached the quarterfinals of the Family Circle Cup for the second straight year with wins over Alla Kudryavtseva and Venus Williams in the second and third rounds respectively. She then advanced to the semifinals for the first time after defeating world no. 8 Jelena Janković, her fourth win over a top-10 player, but lost to Andrea Petkovic. At the Fed Cup World Group Play-offs two weeks later, Bouchard helped Canada get its place in the World Group I, the first time for the country since the introduction of the new World Group format in 1995, by winning her two singles matches. At the Nürnberger Versicherungscup, a French Open warm-up tournament, Bouchard won the first WTA singles title of her career with a victory over Karolína Plíšková in the final. She is the first Canadian to win a WTA singles title since Aleksandra Wozniak at the Bank of the West Classic in 2008 and the sixth in history.
At the French Open, Bouchard defeated Shahar Pe'er, Julia Görges, and Johanna Larsson in the first three rounds to set up a clash with world no. 9 Angelique Kerber in the round of 16. She won the match in straight sets in only 52 minutes, her fifth victory over a member of the top 10, to reach the quarterfinals. She then defeated Carla Suárez Navarro in three sets, coming back from 2-5 down and 1-4 down in the first and deciding set respectively, to make it to her second consecutive Grand Slam semifinal. In the semifinals, she was eliminated by world no. 8 and eventual tournament winner Maria Sharapova in three sets.
Bouchard suffered an opening-round exit at the Topshelf Open as the third seed, where she lost to Vania King in three sets. At Wimbledon, Bouchard defeated Daniela Hantuchová, Sílvia Soler Espinosa, Andrea Petkovic, Alizé Cornet, and Angelique Kerber, all in straight sets, to make it to her third straight Grand Slam semifinal. In doing so, she became the first WTA player to make the semifinals of the first three Grand Slams of the season since Dinara Safina in 2009, and guaranteed her first top-10 WTA ranking following the tournament. She then defeated world no. 3 Simona Halep in straight sets to become the first Canadian-born player representing Canada to make it into a Grand Slam singles final, ultimately falling to Wimbledon 2011 champion Petra Kvitová in straight sets.
Bouchard was scheduled to start her US Open Series campaign at the Citi Open; however, she withdrew from the tournament citing a right knee injury. She played her first tournament since Wimbledon at the Rogers Cup in her hometown of Montreal. Seeded fifth, she received a first-round bye and faced American Shelby Rogers in her opener. Bouchard suffered a shocking three-set loss. Bouchard was the seventh seed at the Western & Southern Open and lost again in three sets in the second round, this time to Svetlana Kuznetsova. At the US Open, she was defeated by Ekaterina Makarova in the fourth round. Bouchard received a main-draw wildcard (after forgetting to enter) to participate in the Hong Kong Open, but pulled out of the tournament due to heat stroke suffered at the US Open. She had been the image of promotion for the tournament and promoted widely. Her last-minute withdrawal sparked criticism, as she had allegedly agreed to appearance fees and signed contracts, to which the WTA responded by fining the tournament official. At the inaugural Wuhan Open, Bouchard reached her first WTA Premier 5 final with wins over Mona Barthel, Alison Riske, Alizé Cornet and no. 7 Caroline Wozniacki. She was defeated by Petra Kvitová in the final, in a rematch of the Wimbledon final.
In October, Bouchard qualified for the 2014 WTA Finals, hosted in Singapore, and was joined by top players Serena Williams, Maria Sharapova, Petra Kvitová, Simona Halep, Agnieszka Radwańska, Ana Ivanovic, and Caroline Wozniacki. She was eliminated in the round-robin stage.
At the end of the 2014 season, she was named the WTA Most Improved Player. On November 24, 2014, it was announced that Saviano and Bouchard were parting ways.
Bouchard started her season at the Hopman Cup, representing Canada alongside Vasek Pospisil. She lost her first match against Czech Republic's Lucie Šafářová and Canada went on to lose the tie. Then in the tie against the United States, Bouchard beat Serena Williams, while Pospisil beat John Isner to give Canada the win. They defeated Italy in the last tie, but despite the win, they finished second in the group and were eliminated. At the Australian Open, Bouchard lost in the quarterfinals to Maria Sharapova in straight sets. On February 5, 2015, Bouchard began working with Sam Sumyk, who had previously coached Victoria Azarenka to grand slam success.
Bouchard, the top seed at BNP Paribas Fortis Diamond Games at Antwerp, was eliminated in the second round by Mona Barthel after a first-round bye. At the BNP Paribas Open, Bouchard was eliminated in the fourth round by qualifier Lesia Tsurenko. A week later in Miami, after receiving a first-round bye, Bouchard was defeated in the second round by yet another qualifier, Tatjana Maria in straight sets.
Bouchard began her clay season at the Family Circle Cup. After receiving a bye in the first round, she lost in the second round to unseeded Lauren Davis in straight sets. Bouchard then participated in Fed Cup, representing team Canada. She went on to lose both of her singles matches to Romanians Alexandra Dulgheru and Andreea Mitu. Canada was hence relegated to the World Group II division.
Bouchard lost her first-round match against Barbora Strýcová at the Madrid Open after winning the first set and up with a break in the second, which put her losing streak at the time at six matches. The next week at the Internazionali BNL d'Italia, she won her first match since March after defeating Zarina Diyas in the second round, but lost in the next round to eventual finalist Carla Suárez Navarro. At the French Open, Bouchard was eliminated in the first round, losing to Kristina Mladenovic.
Bouchard's losing streak continued when she lost in the first round to Yaroslava Shvedova at the Topshelf Open as a wildcard entry and top seed, then in the second round of the Aegon Classic yet again to Mladenovic after getting bagelled in the third set in Birmingham, having received a first round bye. Bouchard won her first match on grass by defeating Alison Riske in the second round in Eastbourne. However, she was forced to retire against eventual champion Belinda Bencic in round three with an abdominal injury. Bouchard next headed to Wimbledon as the defending finalist and the 12th seed. She was taken down in straight sets by qualifier Duan Yingying in the opening round, her second consecutive first round loss at the Grand Slams. This loss would push her down to no. 26, her first time out of the top 20 since her semifinal appearance at the 2014 Australian Open. After just six months, Sumyk was fired by Bouchard as coach.
At the Rogers Cup in August, her first tournament in more than a month and her home event, Bouchard was again defeated by eventual champion Belinda Bencic in the first round. At the Western & Southern Open the next week, she progressed to the second round over Kateryna Bondarenko in two tie-breaks, her first match win since June, but was immediately eliminated by eventual semifinalist Elina Svitolina. In New Haven, Bouchard was defeated easily in the first round by Roberta Vinci.
At the US Open, she defeated Alison Riske and Polona Hercog, respectively, in the first and second rounds, her first back-to-back wins since March at the BNP Paribas Open. She next faced Dominika Cibulková and won in three sets to reach the fourth round for the second straight year. The tournament was seen as her return to form, as she was also advancing in the doubles and mixed doubles. She was scheduled to play Roberta Vinci in the fourth round, but had to withdraw due to a concussion, an injury she suffered after slipping and falling in the locker-room. The injury also forced her to withdraw from other tournaments and she played only one match in the rest of 2015, against Andrea Petkovic at the China Open, a match she had to retire from in the second set after suffering from dizziness. A lawsuit has been filed against the United States Tennis Association on her behalf, seeking damages following a jury trial, saying that she suffered a "severe head injury" because the floor of the women's locker room had been swabbed with a "slippery, foreign and dangerous substance" which had not been cleaned up.
After over three months since her last match, Bouchard started the new season at the Shenzhen Open, winning in the first two rounds over Donna Vekić and Nicole Gibbs, respectively. She was defeated by Tímea Babos in the quarterfinals. The following week at the Hobart International, she had her most decisive victory in almost a year, beating Bethanie Mattek-Sands with the loss of just three games, followed by a tough straight-set win over Alison Van Uytvanck to bring her into her second straight quarterfinal of the year. She then defeated Camila Giorgi and Dominika Cibulková to reach her first final since the 2014 Wuhan Open; however, she lost in straight sets to Alizé Cornet.
Bouchard next played the Australian Open, where she was unseeded at a grand slam for the first time since 2013. She won her opening match against Aleksandra Krunić, before falling to world no. 4 Agnieszka Radwańska in the second round. In February, she reached the third round of the Qatar Total Open before falling to Zheng Saisai in straight sets. In March at the Malaysian Open, Bouchard advanced to her second final of the season where she was defeated by Elina Svitolina in three sets.
At Indian Wells, she lost in the third round to Timea Bacsinszky. After mutually parting ways with Thomas Hogstedt, Bouchard re-hired Saviano as coach prior to the clay court season. At the French Open, she advanced to the second round but lost to Bacsinszky again, despite leading 4–1 in the first set. After the match, Bouchard publicly admitted that her struggles on the court the previous year had led to her struggling to eat properly. This sparked rumours that she had developed an eating disorder, which she soon denied. 
Bouchard's grass court season began with a disastrous loss to qualifier Elise Mertens at the Ricoh Open in which she won just two games. She went on to be eliminated at the second round of the Mallorca Open by Anastasija Sevastova and then reached the third round at Eastbourne, losing again to Radwanska.
At Wimbledon, Bouchard beat Magdalena Rybarikova in straight sets, in a match that began on the outside courts but was finished under the closed roof of Centre Court due to an extremely long rain delay. Less than 24 hours later, she was back on Centre Court and won back-to-back matches in a grand slam for the first time this year, defeating Johanna Konta in three sets. In the third round, she lost in straight sets to Dominika Cibulkova.
Bouchard plays very aggressive tennis and is known for hitting the ball early and rushing her opponent with a severely high groundstroke tempo. She will also make drastic and unpredictable changes in ball direction, which also causes many points won and winners, as her opponents don't know where she's going. However a lot of her shots tend to land outside the court, making the shot accuracy percentage very low.
Bouchard uses a Babolat Pure Aero racquet. Her equipment sponsors are Nike and Babolat.
In June 2014, Bouchard signed a three-year endorsement deal with Coca-Cola, following earlier agreements with Rogers Communications, Pinty's, and equipment sponsors Nike and Babolat. The following summer in June 2015, Bouchard signed a 10-year partnership with Aviva Canada.
Bouchard played for Team Canada at the 2016 NBA All-Star Weekend Celebrity Game held at Toronto, partnering with tennis player Milos Raonic and former WNBA player Tammy Sutton-Brown.
This table is current through the 2016 Wimbledon Championships.
Notes
1 Bouchard's 2015 US Open withdrawal in the fourth round does not count as a loss.
This table is current through the 2016 Wimbledon Championships.
2013 – WTA Newcomer of the Year
2013 – Tennis Canada female player of the year
2013 – Bobbie Rosenfeld Award
2014 – QMI Agency Canadian Athlete of the Year
2014 – WTA Most Improved Player
2014 – Tennis Canada female player of the year
2014 – Bobbie Rosenfeld Award
2015 – Tennis Canada female player of the year
