Ryan James Shawcross /ˈʃɔːkrɒs/ (born 4 October 1987) is an English professional footballer who plays as a centre-back for Premier League club Stoke City.
Shawcross began his career with Manchester United and made his debut for the club against Crewe Alexandra in the League Cup; he then spent time on loan at Belgian feeder club Royal Antwerp. He joined Stoke City on loan in August 2007 and made an instant impact scoring on his debut against Cardiff City. His good form prompted Stoke to pay Manchester United £1 million in January 2008 to keep him at the Britannia Stadium. He formed a good defensive partnership with Leon Cort as Stoke gained promotion to the Premier League for the first time, ending 23 years away from the top flight.
Despite making a bad start to Premier League football, Shawcross established himself as first-choice centre-back along with Abdoulaye Faye. Stoke comfortably stayed up, and after another mid-table finish in 2009–10, Shawcross was handed the Captain's armband by manager Tony Pulis ahead of the 2010–11 season. With Faye drifting out of the side, Robert Huth became Shawcross's defensive partner and the team reached the 2011 FA Cup Final, finishing runners-up to Manchester City. The run to the final also meant that Stoke entered the UEFA Europa League in 2011–12, and they reached the round of 32 losing to Spanish side Valencia. Shawcross continued to be a regular under Pulis in 2012–13 and then under Mark Hughes in 2013–14 which saw him win the player of the year award.
Born in Chester, Cheshire, Shawcross was raised in Buckley, Flintshire, Wales and attended Elfed High School in Buckley. While living in Buckley, Shawcross played for his local team Buckley Town's youth team in the Cymru Alliance.
During his primary school days, Shawcross played representative level football for Flintshire Boys; this team counts Gary Speed, Michael Owen and Ian Rush amongst its former players. Shawcross' younger brother, Rory, also a defender, has also played for this team. When Shawcross was 15 years old, he and a number of Flintshire Boys players had a trial at Football League club Wrexham who offered contracts to some players but not to Shawcross. However, just three weeks later, he had a trial at Manchester United and was offered a contract at their academy.
Early in his Manchester United career, Shawcross made 22 appearances for the Under 17s, in 2003–04, scoring against Nottingham Forest and Blackburn Rovers. In 2004–05, Shawcross made 21 appearances for the Under 18s, scoring against Everton on 5 March 2005. He also made five appearances for United’s Central League Reserve side, which won the Division One West title.
During the 2005–06 season, Shawcross made ten appearances in the Premier Reserve League and was a part of United's successful Reserve side that won the treble of the Manchester Senior Cup, FA Premier Reserve League North and FA Premier Reserve Play-off against Tottenham Hotspur Reserves. On 25 October 2006, Shawcross made his senior debut as a substitute for fellow debutant Michael Barnes in a 2–1 League Cup third round win away at Crewe Alexandra. He also came on in the final minute of a shock 1–0 defeat to Southend United in the next round. In January 2007, he was sent on loan to Royal Antwerp, where he appeared regularly, and helped Antwerp to make it into the Belgian Second Division play-offs, scoring three goals, before returning to Manchester in the summer.
On 9 August 2007, Shawcross was sent on loan again, this time to Championship club Stoke City, for six months. He scored his first two goals for Stoke during his first two games, one on his debut during a 1–0 win on the opening day of the season, against Cardiff City, with the other during a League Cup game against Rochdale in which Stoke lost on penalties. After Stoke's 2–1 win over Charlton Athletic Shawcross expressed his delight at Stoke's early season from. In October 2007 he was involved in a tackle with Sheffield Wednesday player Francis Jeffers who sustained ligament damage and a three-month lay-off from the game. Despite this Shawcross was named as the Championship's player of the month for October.
Stoke made advances to make Shawcross' loan permanent during the January 2008 transfer window, and the move was finally completed on 18 January 2008, with Stoke paying Manchester United an initial £1m, which eventually rose to a club record £2m due to Shawcross' appearances for Stoke and the team achieving promotion the following May. Additionally, Alex Ferguson negotiated a clause that gives Manchester United first refusal on any offer for the player. He lost his place in the side for the final few games of the promotion winning season to loan signing Chris Riggott.
After starting in Stoke's first game in the Premier League in a 3–1 defeat away at Bolton Wanderers Shawcross lost his place in the side to new signing Ibrahima Sonko and he stated that he might have to leave Stoke if the manager signed another defender. Shawcross re-claimed his place in side in late 2008 due to Sonko's poor performances. In a match against Arsenal in November 2008 a Shawcross off-the-pitch tackle led to a three-week injury to Emmanuel Adebayor. Following his return to the side Shawcross scored in games against Aston Villa, Everton, and Middlesbrough. The goal against Boro proved to be vital win for Stoke in the fight from relegation. After a fine debut Premier League season, Shawcross was linked to several clubs Premier League rivals however both Shawcross and Stoke manager Tony Pulis dismissed this speculation.
He scored from a header in Stoke's first match of the 2009–10 season, helping them to a 2–0 win over Burnley. On 12 December 2009, he scored his second goal in the 2009–10 season for Stoke against Wigan Athletic in a 2–2 draw. Shawcross was again involved in an incident with Emmanuel Adebayor in a FA Cup fifth round replay against Manchester City. Adebayor struck Shawcross in the face and was sent off, Shawcross went on to score Stoke's second goal in a 3–1 win. On 27 February 2010, in a game against Arsenal, Shawcross was sent off after his tackle left Arsenal midfielder Aaron Ramsey with a broken leg. Shawcross himself wept when he saw the extent of the injury to Ramsey, who had to be stretchered off and taken to hospital. Shawcross, who apologized via text message, was defended by his team mates Danny Pugh and Rory Delap after the match, On the same day, Shawcross received a call-up to the England national side.
Shawcross was given the Stoke City captaincy for the 2010–11 season taking over from Abdoulaye Faye. After a number of impressive performances for Stoke Shawcross has again been linked with a move away from the Britannia Stadium. However City chairman Peter Coates issued a 'Hand off warning'. He scored his first goal for almost a year in the FA Cup against Brighton & Hove Albion. Stoke beat West Ham United in the quarter final and Shawcross has said he will be proud to lead out Stoke City at Wembley in the semi-final against Bolton Wanderers. Stoke beat Bolton 5–0 earning a place in the clubs first FA Cup Final. Shawcross therefore became the first Stoke City captain to play in a FA Cup Final, losing to Manchester City. Despite the defeat Stoke were able to claim a place in the UEFA Europa League.
Prior to the start of the 2011–12 season manager Tony Pulis confirmed that Shawcross would remain as club captain. He had a busy season playing in 49 of the clubs 56 fixtures helping the club reach the last 32 of the Europa League and the quarter final of the FA Cup. He was named as captain for a third season running, with Pulis warning Shawcross against complacency. In a Premier League match against Everton on 15 December 2012 Shawcross was deliberately headbutted by Marouane Fellaini which was missed by referee Mark Halsey. After the match Fellaini issued a public apology to Shawcross and was given a retrospective three match ban. On 3 January 2013, Shawcross signed a 5 1⁄2-year contract extension with the "Potters", keeping him at the Britannia Stadium until the summer of 2018. After agreeing to his new contract Tony Pulis stated that Shawcross can go on to become a legend at the club. He played in 40 matches in 2012–13 season, scoring once against Wigan Athletic as Stoke finished in 13th position.
At the end of the 2012–13 season Tony Pulis was sacked and replaced by Mark Hughes, who decided that Shawcross would retain the captaincy for a fifth season. On 24 August 2013 Shawcross scored the winning goal against Crystal Palace which earned City their first win of the 2013–14 season. On 12 April 2014 Shawcross made his 200th appearance in the Premier League becoming the first Stoke player to reach that milestone. Shawcross missed just one match in 2013–14 as Stoke finished in 9th position in the Premier League and he also won the player of the year award.
Shawcross scored Stoke's first goal of the 2014–15 season in a 1–1 draw with Hull City on 24 August 2014. Against Swansea City on 29 October 2014, Shawcross was penalized by referee Michael Oliver for holding Wilfried Bony at a corner. This prompted Mark Hughes to take Shawcross off man-marking duties at set-plays. He made his 300th appearance for Stoke on 29 November against Liverpool. On 1 January 2015 he scored against his former club Manchester United in a 1–1 draw. He missed February and most of March with a back injury. He played 37 times for Stoke in 2014–15 as the Potters finished in 9th position for a second season running and they ended the campaign with a 6–1 victory against Liverpool.
Shawcross was ruled out for the first two months of the 2015–16 season after undergoing back surgery. He returned from injury on 27 October 2015 playing in a League Cup victory against Chelsea. However his season was continually disrupted by his back injury restricting him to 23 appearances as Stoke again finished in ninth position.
In January 2008, Shawcross won his first call up to the England under-21 squad for a 2009 UEFA under-21 Championship Qualifying match against the Republic of Ireland. Shawcross previously played for the Wales under-15 team, against Belgium and the Republic of Ireland.
Following Shawcross' fine form in his debut Premier League season, Tony Pulis, his manager at Stoke tipped Shawcross to break into the England senior side.
In September 2009, it was announced that changes have been proposed to the eligibility criteria for British players, which would make Shawcross eligible to play for Wales. Wales under-21 coach Brian Flynn commented that "People who grew up in Wales often can't represent the country they've lived in most of their life because their nearest maternity hospital is in England". In October 2009, FIFA ratified the changes to allow players with five years of compulsory education in a country before the age of 16 to represent that country. Despite this, Shawcross was named in an England squad for the first time for their match against Egypt in March 2010. He was named in the matchday squad but was an unused substitute. Shawcross has been backed by his defensive partner, Robert Huth to earn an England call up. In July 2011 Shawcross confirmed that he will not consider playing for Wales.
On 11 July 2012 however, Wales national team manager Chris Coleman said he would consult Arsenal and Wales team ex-captain Aaron Ramsey regarding the possibility of Shawcross to play for the Welsh team. However Shawcross again stated that his only international ambition is to play for England.
Shawcross was called up to the England team by Roy Hodgson on 4 October 2012 for the 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifiers against Poland and San Marino. He made his England debut in a friendly against Sweden on 14 November 2012 at the Friends Arena.
Shawcross lives in Nantwich with his wife Kath. The couple have three children. He has been involved in charity work.
As of match played 15 May 2016
As of match played 14 November 2012.
Stoke City
Football League Championship runner-up: 2007–08
Football League Championship Player of the Month: October 2008
PFA Team of the Year (Championship): 2008
Stoke City Young Player of the Year: 2008, 2009, 2010
Sir Stanley Matthews Potteries Footballer of the Year: 2010
Stoke City Coaches Player of the Year: 2013 (joint with Asmir Begović)
Stoke City Player of the Year: 2014
