Robert Lawrence Stine (born October 8, 1943), sometimes known as Jovial Bob Stine and Eric Affabee, is an American novelist, short story writer, television producer, screenwriter, and executive editor. He has been referred to as the "Stephen King of children's literature" and is the author of hundreds of horror fiction novels, including the books in the Fear Street, Goosebumps, Rotten School, Mostly Ghostly, and The Nightmare Room series. Some of his other works include a Space Cadets trilogy, two Hark gamebooks, and dozens of joke books. As of 2008, Stine's books have sold over 400 million copies.
Stine was born on October 8, 1943 in Columbus, Ohio, the son of Lewis Stine, a shipping clerk, and Anne Feinstein. He grew up in Bexley, Ohio. His family was Jewish. He began writing at age nine, when he found a typewriter in his attic, subsequently beginning to type stories and joke books. He graduated from Ohio State University in 1965 with a Bachelor of Arts in English. While at OSU, R. L. Stine edited the OSU humor magazine The Sundial for three out of his four years there. He later moved to New York City to pursue his career as a writer.
Stine wrote dozens of humor books for kids under the name Jovial Bob Stine and created the humor magazine Bananas. Bananas was for teenagers published by Scholastic Press for 72 issues between 1975 and 1984, plus various "Yearbooks" and paperback books. Stine was editor and responsible for much of the writing (other contributors included writers Robert Leighton, Suzanne Lord and Jane Samuels and artists Sam Viviano, Samuel B. Whitehead, Bob K. Taylor, Bryan Hendrix, Bill Basso, and Howard Cruse). Recurring features included "Hey – Lighten Up!", "It Never Fails!", "Phone Calls", "Joe" (a comic strip by John Holmstrom), "Phil Fly", "Don't You Wish...", "Doctor Duck", "The Teens of Ferret High", "First Date" (a comic strip by Alyse Newman), and "Ask Doctor Si N. Tific".
In 1986, Stine wrote his first horror novel, called Blind Date. He followed with many other novels, including The Babysitter, Beach House, Hit and Run, and The Girlfriend. He was also the co-creator and head writer for the Nickelodeon Network children's television show Eureeka's Castle, original episodes of which aired as part of the Nick Jr. programming block during the 1989-1995 seasons.
In 1989, Stine started writing Fear Street books. Before launching the Goosebumps series, Stine authored three humorous science fiction books in the Space Cadets series titled Jerks in Training, Bozos on Patrol, and Losers in Space. In 1992, Stine and Parachute went on to launch Goosebumps.
Also produced was a Goosebumps TV series that ran for four seasons from 1995–1998 and three video games; Escape from HorrorLand, Attack of the Mutant and Goosebumps HorrorLand. In 1995, Stine's first novel targeted at adults, called Superstitious, was published. He has since published three other adult-oriented novels; The Sitter, Eye Candy, and Red Rain.
In the first decade of the 21st century, Stine has worked on installments of five different book series, Mostly Ghostly, Rotten School, Fear Street, The Nightmare Room, Goosebumps Horrorland and the stand-alone novels Dangerous Girls (2003) and The Taste of Night (2004). Also, a direct-to-DVD movie The Haunting Hour Volume One: Don't Think About It, starring Emily Osment was released by Universal Home Entertainment on September 4, 2007. Jack Black portrayed a fictionalized version of Stine in the 2015 film Goosebumps, while Stine himself made a cameo appearance, playing a teacher named "Mr. Black".
According to Forbes List of the 40 best-paid Entertainers of 1996–97, Stine placed 36th with an income of $41 million for the fiscal year. His books have sold over 400 million copies worldwide as of 2008, landing on many bestseller lists. In three consecutive years during the 1990s, USA Today named Stine as America's number one best-selling author.
Among the awards he has received are the 2002 Champion of Reading Award from the Free Public Library of Philadelphia (that award's first year), the Disney Adventures Kids' Choice Award for Best Book-Mystery/Horror (three-time recipient) and the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards (also received three times). During the 1990s, Stine was listed on People Weekly's "Most Intriguing People" list, and in 2003, the Guinness Book of World Records named Stine as the best-selling children's book series author of all time. He won the Thriller Writers of America Silver Bullet Award in 2007, and the Horror Writers Association's Lifetime Achievement Award in 2014. His stories have even inspired R. L. Stine's Haunted Lighthouse, 4D movie-based attractions at SeaWorld (San Antonio and San Diego) and Busch Gardens (Williamsburg and Tampa).
On June 22, 1969, Stine married Jane Waldhorn, an editor and writer who later co-founded Parachute Press in 1983. The couple's only child, Matthew (born June 7, 1980) works in the music industry.
Jerks-in-Training
Losers in Space
Bozos on Patrol
Cry of the Cat
Bride of the Living Dummy
Creature Teacher
Invasion of the Body Squeezers, Part I
Invasion of the Body Squeezers, Part II
I Am Your Evil Twin
Revenge R Us
Fright Camp
Are You Terrified Yet?
Headless Halloween
Attack of the Graveyard Ghouls
Brain Juice
Return to HorrorLand
Jekyll and Heidi
Scream School
The Mummy Walks
The Werewolf in the Living Room
Horrors of the Black Ring
Return to Ghost Camp
Be Afraid – Be Very Afraid!
The Haunted Car
Full Moon Fever
Slappy's Nightmare
Earth Geeks Must Go!
Ghost in the Mirror
Escape from the Carnival of Horrors
Tick Tock, You're Dead!
Trapped in Bat Wing Hall
The Deadly Experiments of Dr. Eeek
Night in Werewolf Woods
Beware of the Purple Peanut Butter
Under the Magician's Spell
The Curse of the Creeping Coffin
The Knight in Screaming Armor
Diary of a Mad Mummy
Deep in the Jungle of Doom
Welcome to the Wicked Wax Museum
Scream of the Evil Genie
The Creepy Creations of Professor Shock
Please Don't Feed the Vampire!
Secret Agent Grandma
Little Comic Shop of Horrors
Attack of the Beastly Baby-sitter
Escape from Camp Run-for-Your-Life
Toy Terror: Batteries Included
The Twisted Tale of Tiki Island
Return to the Carnival of Horrors
Zapped in Space
Lost in Stinkeye Swamp
Shop Till You Drop...Dead!
Alone in Snakebite Canyon
Checkout Time at the Dead-End Hotel
Night of a Thousand Claws
Invaders from the Big Screen
You're Plant Food!
The Werewolf of Twisted Tree Lodge
It's Only a Nightmare
It Came from the Internet
Elevator to Nowhere
Hocus-Pocus Horror
Ship of Ghouls
Escape from Horror House
Into the Twister of Terror
Scary Birthday to You
Zombie School
Danger Time
All-Day Nightmare
Into the Jaws of Doom
Return to Terror Tower
Trapped in the Circus of Fear
One Night in Payne House
The Curse of the Cave Creatures
Revenge of the Body Squeezers
Trick or...Trapped!
Weekend at Poison Lake
The New Girl
The Surprise Party
The Overnight
Missing
The Wrong Number
The Sleepwalker
Haunted
Halloween Party
The Stepsister
Ski Weekend
The Fire Game
Lights Out
The Secret Bedroom
The Knife
The Prom Queen
First Date
The Best Friend
The Cheater
Sunburn
The New Boy
The Dare
Bad Dreams
Double Date
The Thrill Club
One Evil Summer
The Mind Reader
Wrong Number 2
Truth or Dare
Dead End
Final Grade
Switched
College Weekend
The Stepsister 2
What Holly Heard
The Face
Secret Admirer
The Perfect Date
The Confession
The Boy Next Door
Night Games
Runaway
Killer's Kiss
All-Night Party
The Rich Girl
Cat
Fear Hall: The Beginning
Fear Hall: The Conclusion
Who Killed The Homecoming Queen?
Into The Dark
Best Friend 2
Trapped
Party Games
Don't Stay Up Late
The Lost Girl
Fear Street Super Thriller: Party Games & Don't Stay Up Late
The Stepbrother
Camp Out
Scream, Jennifer, Scream!
The Bad Girl
Party Summer
Silent Night
Goodnight Kiss
Broken Hearts
Silent Night 2
The Dead Lifeguard
Cheerleaders: The New Evil
Bad Moonlight
The New Year's Party
Goodnight Kiss 2
Silent Night 3
High Tide
Cheerleaders: The Evil Lives!
The First Evil
The Second Evil
The Third Evil
The New Evil
The Evil Lives!
The Betrayal
The Secret
The Burning
The First Horror
The Second Horror
The Third Horror
The Evil Moon
The Dark Secret
The Deadly Fire
The First Scream
The Loudest Scream
The Last Scream
A New Fear
House of Whispers
Forbidden Secrets
The Sign of Fear
The Hidden Evil
Daughters of Silence
Children of Fear
Dance of Death
Heart of the Hunter
The Awakening Evil
Circle of Fire
Chamber of Fear
Faces of Terror
One Last Kiss
Door of Death
The Hand of Power
Let's Party
In Too Deep
The Thirst
No Answer
Last Chance
The Gift
Fight Team, Fight
Sweetheart, Evil Heart
Spring Break
Wicked
The Prom Date
Graduation Day
Moonlight Secrets
Midnight Games
Darkest Dawn
Hide and Shriek
Who's Been Sleeping in My Grave?
The Attack of the Aqua Apes
Nightmare in 3-D
Stay Away from the Tree House
Eye of the Fortuneteller
Fright Knight
The Ooze
Revenge of the Shadow People
The Bugman Lives!
The Boy Who Ate Fear Street
Night of the Werecat
How to Be a Vampire
Body Switchers from Outer Space
Fright Christmas
Don't Ever Get Sick at Granny's
House of a Thousand Screams
Camp Fear Ghouls
Three Evil Wishes
Spell of the Screaming Jokers
The Creature from Club Lagoona
Field of Screams
Why I'm Not Afraid of Ghosts
Monster Dog
Halloween Bugs Me!
Go to Your Tomb – Right Now!
Parents from the 13th Dimension
Hide and Shriek II
The Tale of the Blue Monkey
I Was a Sixth-Grade Zombie
Escape of the He-Beast
Caution: Aliens at Work
Attack of the Vampire Worms
Horror Hotel Pt. 1: The Vampire Checks in
Horror Hotel Pt. 2: Ghost in the Guest Room
The Funhouse of Dr. Freek
Who Let the Ghosts Out?
Have You Met My Ghoulfriend?
One Night in Doom House
Little Camp of Horrors
Ghouls Gone Wild
Let's Get This Party Haunted!
Freaks and Shrieks
Don't Close Your Eyes!
The Big Blueberry Barf-Off!
The Great Smelling Bee
The Good, the Bad and the Very Slimy
Lose, Team, Lose!
Shake, Rattle and Hurl!
The Heinie Prize
Dudes, the School is Haunted!
The Teacher from Heck
Party Poopers
The Rottenest Angel
Punk'd and Skunked
Battle of the Dum Diddys
Got Cake?
Night of the Creepy Things
Calling All Birdbrains
Dumb Clucks
Don't Forget Me!
Locker 13
My Name is Evil
Liar Liar
Dear Diary, I'm Dead
They Call Me Creature
The Howler
Shadow Girl
Camp Nowhere
Full Moon Halloween
Scare School
Visitors
Fear Games
What Scares You the Most?
No Survivors
Welcome to HorrorLand: A Survival Guide
Revenge of the Living Dummy
Creep from the Deep
Monster Blood for Breakfast!
The Scream of the Haunted Mask
Dr. Maniac vs. Robby Schwartz
Who's Your Mummy?
My Friends Call Me Monster
Say Cheese – And Die Screaming!
Welcome to Camp Slither
Help! We Have Strange Powers!
Escape from HorrorLand
The Streets of Panic Park
When the Ghost Dog Howls
Little Shop of Hamsters
Heads, You Lose!
Weirdo Halloween
The Wizard Of Ooze
Slappy's New Year!
The Horror at Chiller House
Claws!
Night of Giant Everything
The Five Masks of Dr. Screem
Why I Quit Zombie School
Don't Scream!
The Birthday Party of No Return
Son of Slappy
Planet of the Lawn Gnomes
How I Met My Monster
Frankenstein's Dog
Dr. Maniac Will See You Now
Creature Teacher: The Final Exam
A Nightmare on Clown Street
Special Edition
Zombie Halloween
The 12 Screams of Christmas
The Badlands of Hark
The Invaders of Hark
Both were re-released in 2010 under the name Bitten. ISBN 978-0060530808
Dangerous Girls
The Taste of Night
The Adventures of Shrinkman
The Beast
The Beast 2
Curtains
Eye Candy
It's the First Day of School...Forever!
A Midsummer Night's Scream
Phone Calls
Red Rain
The Sitter
Superstitious
Three Faces of Me
When Good Ghouls Go Bad
Zombie Town
Beware! (edited by Stine)
The Haunting Hour
The Nightmare Hour
Tales to Give You Goosebumps
More Tales to Give You Goosebumps
Even More Tales to Give You Goosebumps
Still More Tales to Give You Goosebumps
More and More Tales to Give You Goosebumps
More and More and More Tales to Give You Goosebumps
Goosebumps Triple Header, Book 1
Goosebumps Triple Header, Book 2
"The Spell"
"Dead of Night"
"The Head Start"
"Lucky at Cards"
"The Kid Behind the Door"
"The Terror After School"
"Do Some Damage!"
"Curse of the Smiling Mummy"
"Can You Keep a Secret?"
"The Vampire Club"
"My Worst Nightmare"
"The Wrong Room"
101 Vacation Jokes
101 Wacky Kid Jokes
101 Silly Monster Jokes
The Absurdly Silly Encyclopaedia and Fly Swatter
Amazing Adventure of Me, Myself and I
Blips: The First Book of Videogame Funnies
Cool Kids' Guide to Summer Camp
Doggone Dog Joke Book
Don't Stand in the Soup
How to Be Funny
It Came From Ohio!: My Life As A Writer (autobiography)
Miami Mice
Pork and Beans: Play Date
The Sick of Being Sick Book
You Know It's Going to Be A Long School Year When...
My Secret Identity
Pigs' Book of World Records
Jovial Bob's Computer Joke Book
Ghostbusters II Storybook
Spaceballs: The Book
Big Top Pee-Wee
The Jet Fighter Trap
The Protectors: The Petrova Twist
Gnasty Gnomes
Broken Date
How I Broke Up With Ernie
Demons of the Deep
The Time Raider
Golden Sword of Dragonwalk
Horrors of the Haunted Museum
Instant Millionaire
Indiana Jones and the Curse of Horror Island
Indiana Jones and the Giants of the Silver Tower
Indiana Jones and the Cult of the Mummy's Crypt
James Bond in Win, Place or Die
Indiana Jones and the Ape Slaves of Howling Island
Golden Girl and the Vanishing Unicorn
The books followed the standard Choose Your Own Adventure formula, but also featured "flagged" choices that were determined by choices earlier in the book. (For example, "If you already have the Unfathomable Pocket of Crowden, turn to page 65; otherwise, turn to page 78.") The books attempted to introduce a further "role-playing game-like" element with the inclusion of randomization to determine events such as the outcome of a battle or success of a spell. These RPG-like elements were designed for young readers, and were thus very simple, as opposed to the complex mechanics of the teen-oriented Fighting Fantasy and Lone Wolf series of gamebooks.
The Forest of Twisted Dreams
The Siege of the Dragonriders (as Eric Affabee)
Challenge of the Wolf Knight
The Dragon Queen's Revenge (as Eric Affabee)
Cavern of the Phantoms
Attack on the King (as Eric Affabee)
Operation: Star Raider (as Eric Affabee)
Operation: Deadly Decoy
Operation: Mindbender
Serpentor and the Mummy Warrior
Siege of Serpentor
Jungle Raid
Fatal Kiss
Grave Intentions
Deadly Rumours
Blind Date
Twisted
The Babysitter
Beach Party
The Boyfriend
The Babysitter II
The Girlfriend
The Snowman
Beach House
Hit and Run
The Hitchhiker
Halloween Night
The Babysitter III
The Dead Girlfriend
Call Waiting
Halloween Night II
I Saw You That Night!
The Witness
The Babysitter IV
Dynamite (magazine)
