Ai Kago (加護 亜依, Kago Ai) (born February 7, 1988 in Yamatotokada, Nara, Japan) is a Japanese singer, actress, author and former Guinness World Record holder.
At age 12, Kago won the 4th National Audition of Morning Musume held by the Up-Front Works Agency in 2000, which led to her admission into the extremely popular idol group as a 4th generation member. In the same year, she became a founding member of Minimoni. In 2004, she graduated from both the aforementioned groups and formed W with Nozomi Tsuji.
In 2006, photos of the under-age Kago smoking were leaked by the media. As a result, she was immediately suspended for one year by Up-Front Agency. In 2007, toward the end of her suspension, she was caught once again smoking. This resulted in her contract being terminated permanently.
On April 15, 2000, Kago, along with Rika Ishikawa, Hitomi Yoshizawa, and Nozomi Tsuji, were inducted into the idol group Morning Musume as its fourth generation. Their recording debut was in the group's ninth single "Happy Summer Wedding".
Kago and Tsuji's addition to the group received positive critical response. With an increasing fan base, they, along with fellow Morning Musume member Mari Yaguchi and Coconuts Musume member Mika Todd, formed a new subgroup named Minimoni. In addition to this, Kago was also admitted into established subgroup Tanpopo as a second generation member.
From 2001 to 2004 Kago participated in the annual Hello! Project shuffle units, being part of the smallest units the first three times (3-nin Matsuri in 2001, Happy 7 in 2002, and Salt5 in 2003) and joining the 46-member H.P. All Stars in 2004.
In August 2004, Kago and Tsuji graduated from Morning Musume together after Minimoni began their indefinite hiatus. Under the arrangement of the Up-Front Works Agency, Kago and Tsuji formed a new pop duo, W, releasing two albums and six singles together.
Kago and Tsuji shared the world record for the largest hula hoop spun at 4.08 m (13 ft 5 in) in diameter. They set their record on January 1, 2004, during a live New Year's Day television special at Nippon Television Network, Tokyo, Japan. The record appeared in the 2005 and 2006 editions of the Guinness Book of World Records and was the second time that Tsuji held the record, having previously held the record between January 2003 and June 2003. The record was eventually broken by Ashrita Furman (USA) in September 2005.
On May 5, 2007, the Tokyo Broadcasting System's newscast reported that Kago's mother was trying to sign her to a new talent agency in her hometown of Nara.
On August 25, 2007, an interview with Kago's mother in the magazine Josei Seven revealed that after parting company with Hello! Project, Ai Kago left Japan and started residing in New York City.
On April 6, 2008, it was reported by Yahoo! News that Kago was returning to the entertainment industry. Also, in an interview by OhmyNews, Kago admitted that she had begun smoking to feel more like an adult without realizing the impact it would have on her peers and young fans. She stated that she had actually not gone to New York, but rather to Los Angeles for three months in 2007 with her boyfriend. She said she took the trip because she felt like a criminal in Japan. While in LA she met many new people who encouraged her (including Winona Ryder) and was able to reflect on her situation and begin her new life. She also admitted to having considered suicide and having inflicted self-injury upon herself by cutting her wrists. At the end of the interview, Kago states that even though she is now 20 years old and can legally smoke cigarettes, she no longer does or has any desire to do so.
On April 24, 2008, Ai Kago announced on her personal blog website, "Biscuit Club", that she will be appearing in Hong Kong movie Kung Fu Chef with Sammo Hung.
On July 4, 2008, in an interview with Akashiya Sanma, she stated that she had been in Kyoto filming for a movie about Princess Sen, followed by a joint Singapore/Hong Kong project.
On June 24, 2009, she released her first solo single "No HesitAtIon" [sic] on independent record label In Da Groove. On February 16, 2010, she held her first jazz concert at bar JZ Brat in Tokyo, where she expressed her desire to become a singer of this music genre. Kago's first jazz album, Ai Kago meets Jazz: The First Door, was released on March 31, 2010 through P-Vine Records and Avex Marketing. In August 2010 she was invited to perform at music festival Summer Sonic.
In June 2011, Kago announced on her blog that she left R&A Promotions Co.,Ltd in November 2010 due to being unhappy with the direction of her work.
On August 25, 2008, Kago released a book entitled Kago Ai Live—Miseinen Hakusho (ＬＩＶＥ—未成年白書). On a July 13, 2008 post to her personal blog website, "Biscuit Club", Kago described the book as "a book where I talk to young teens about their various troubles and dreams. Idols-in-waiting, exchange students, high school girls, and otaku. The teenage years can be tough, and I had a lot of troubles in those days. But it's important to break through those troubles."
On December 20, 2011, Kago announced on her blog that she registered her marriage earlier in the month and was pregnant. On one of her blog posts, she announced that she had given birth to her first child, a girl Minami, on June 22, 2012.
On February 9, 2006 it was confirmed that the magazine Friday (フライデー) (the same one that provoked Mari Yaguchi's sudden departure from Morning Musume) would publish photos showing Kago smoking. The legal age for smoking in Japan is 20, and Kago had just turned 18 two days prior to the incident. On February 10, Hello! Project issued a press statement saying that the singer had been suspended "indefinitely."
According to an interview in the March 9, 2007 issue of Friday–the same magazine that had published photos of her smoking–Kago revealed she had been serving tea, answering phones and doing assorted secretarial work at the Up-Front Works agency since January 23, 2007, when her employers found it fit for her to return to Tokyo, after she spent most of 2006 under house arrest at her family's residence in Nara.
In the same interview the young idol claimed to have had undergone several changes in regard to her outlook on life, to have become more responsible. Additionally she met up with the other members for the first time at Yokohama Arena, after a lengthy period of time, though the group couldn't quite recognize her at first, given the fact she had lost some weight.
The agency said that they were working on her comeback, though the details were not clear.
On March 26, 2007, following a newly publicized scandal that involved Kago dating a 37-year-old man as well as smoking again, it was announced by Kawaguchi Yuukichi (the director of Up Front Agency) that her contract had been canceled.
In 2009 it was alleged that Kago had a relationship with 33-year-old actor Hidejiro Mizumoto. Mizumoto's wife, Asato, sued them both, stating that she has proof of the affair and that it was the cause for her pending divorce. On May 24, 2009 a family court found in Asato's favor and ordered Mizumoto to hand over his home in Kumamoto and his car to Asato as well as 300,000 yen in child support every month for his three children.
In September 2011, it was widely reported that her boyfriend, age 44, was arrested in relation to attempted extortion to bilk a portion of his own debt by saying that he had close affiliations with the Yamaguchi-gumi yakuza crime syndicate. Her boyfriend allegedly told the victim that he was "in friendly affiliation with the Kodo-kai", and police reported that her boyfriend actually had a close relationship with the boss of the Komatsu-gumi (an affiliate of the Kodo-kai). Kago has been taken in for questioning as well. On September 11, 2011, Kago was rushed to a nearby hospital after agency officials found her on the floor of her apartment with cuts to her wrists. It is believed to have been a suicide attempt. Her life was reported to be not in danger.
Kago's given name, "Ai", has no real meaning written as "亜依", but it is also a homonym for love (愛, ai). Kago has sometimes said in interviews that she was named that by her parents because she was conceived out of wedlock.
Singles
Albums
AI KAGO meets JAZZ (March 31, 2010 P-Vine)
Compilation Albums
Kirakira Majocco Cluv (キラキラ 魔女ッ娘 Cluv) (Various Artists, Feb 10, 2010 P-Vine)
Lum no Love Song (Urusei Yatsura OP) / Ai Kago × Brian Hardgroove (Public Enemy)
Himitsu no Akko-chan (Himitsu no Akko-chan OP) / Ai Kago × Paolo Scotti
