Métal hurlant (literal translation: "Howling Metal") is a French comics anthology of science fiction and horror comics stories, created in December 1974 by comics artists Jean Giraud (better known as Mœbius) and Philippe Druillet together with journalist-writer Jean-Pierre Dionnet and financial director Bernard Farkas.
The four were collectively known as "Les Humanoïdes Associés" (United Humanoids), which became the name of the publishing house releasing Métal hurlant. It was published in the United States by National Lampoon under the title Heavy Metal. ISSN 0245-590X (Métal Hurlant Aventure).
The magazine was originally released quarterly; it consisted of 68 pages, of which only 18 were in colour. Contributors included Moebius and Druillet, depicting such characters as Arzach and Lone Sloane. Later issues featured Richard Corben, Alejandro Jodorowsky, Enki Bilal, Caza, Serge Clerc, Alain Voss, Berni Wrightson, Milo Manara, Frank Margerin, and many others.
It became bi-monthly with No. 7 and monthly with No. 9. Apart from comics, the magazine contained articles about science fiction books and movies, as well as music and videogame reviews. Métal hurlant, emphasising complex graphics, cinematic imagery and surreal storylines, was highly influential throughout the world as one of the first mature expressions of "adult" comic book making. It ceased publication in July 1987.
Métal hurlant began publishing again in July 2002 by Humanoids Publishing, with a French, English, Spanish and Portuguese version, under the French name. As a "two-headed", transatlantic (France-US) magazine, led by Fabrice Giger in Los Angeles, it published original short stories, sometimes related to existing or to be published comic books. Its aim was to discover young creators and promote the products from the publisher. This incarnation of the magazine ceased publication with issue No. 14, dated November/December 2004.
Stories that were published in Métal hurlant include:
Arzach
Druuna
Exterminator 17
Fragile by Stefano Raffaele
Jeremiah
Kraken
Lone Sloane
Milady 3000
The Zombies That Ate the World by Guy Davis and Jerry Frissen
The Long Tomorrow by Dan O'Bannon and Jean Giraud
Some of their titles have gone on to be adapted into other media.
In October 2011, it was announced that a live-action TV series based on Métal hurlant titled Métal Hurlant Chronicles went into production in France. A French-United Kingdom co-production, the series consists of 12 half-hour episodes to be shown over two seasons. Featured actors include Rutger Hauer, Scott Adkins, Michael Jai White, Karl E. Landler, Joe Flanigan, David Belle, Matt Mullins and James Marsters. In the United States, the series began airing on the Syfy Channel on 14 April 2014.
