Junot Díaz (born December 31, 1968) is a Dominican American writer, creative writing professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and fiction editor at Boston Review. He also serves on the board of advisers for Freedom University, a volunteer organization in Georgia that provides post-secondary instruction to undocumented immigrants. Central to Díaz's work is the immigrant experience. He received the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for his novel The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, in 2008. He is a 2012 MacArthur Fellow.
Born in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, Díaz immigrated with his family to New Jersey when he was six years old. He earned a Bachelor of Arts degree from Rutgers University, and shortly after graduating created the character "Yunior", who served as narrator of several of his later books. After obtaining his MFA from Cornell University, Díaz published his first book, a short story collection entitled Drown in 1995. In 2007, he published his first novel, The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, followed by a second short story collection, This Is How You Lose Her, in 2012. Since 2007, Diaz was reported to be working on another novel, entitled Monstro; however, in June 2015 Diaz stated that he had effectively abandoned that novel.
Díaz was born in Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic. He was the third child in a family of five. Throughout most of his early childhood, he lived with his mother and grandparents while his father worked in the United States. Díaz immigrated to Parlin, New Jersey, in December 1974, where he was re-united with his father. There he lived less than a mile from what he has described as "one of the largest landfills in New Jersey".
Díaz attended Madison Park Elementary and was a voracious reader, often walking four miles in order to borrow books from his public library. At this time Díaz became fascinated with apocalyptic films and books, especially the work of John Christopher, the original Planet of the Apes films, and the BBC mini-series Edge of Darkness. Díaz graduated from Cedar Ridge High School (now merged to form Old Bridge High School) in Old Bridge Township, New Jersey, in 1987, though he would not begin to write formally until years later,
Díaz attended Kean College in Union, New Jersey, for one year before transferring and ultimately completing his BA at Rutgers College in 1992, majoring in English; there he was involved in Demarest Hall, a creative-writing, living-learning, residence hall, and in various student organizations. He was exposed to the authors who would motivate him to become a writer: Toni Morrison and Sandra Cisneros. He worked his way through college by delivering pool tables, washing dishes, pumping gas, and working at Raritan River Steel. During an interview conducted in 2010, Díaz reflected on his experience growing up in America and working his way through college:
"I can safely say I've seen the US from the bottom up ... I may be a success story as an individual. But if you adjust the knob and just take it back one setting to the family unit, I would say my family tells a much more complicated story. It tells the story of two kids in prison. It tells the story of enormous poverty, of tremendous difficulty."
A pervasive theme in his short story collection Drown is the absence of a father, which reflects Diaz's strained relationship with his own father, with whom he no longer keeps in contact. When Diaz once published an article in a Dominican newspaper condemning the country's treatment of Haitians, his father wrote a letter to the editor saying that the writer of the article should "go back home to Haiti".
After graduating from Rutgers, Díaz worked at Rutgers University Press as an editorial assistant. At this time Diaz also first created the quasi-autobiographical character of Yunior in a story he used as part of his application for his MFA program in the early 1990s. The character would become important to much of his later work including Drown and This Is How You Lose Her. Yunior would become central to much of Diaz's work, Diaz later explaining how "My idea, ever since Drown, was to write six or seven books about him that would form one big novel". He earned his MFA from Cornell University in 1995, where he wrote most of his first collection of short stories. Currently, Díaz teaches creative writing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as the Rudge and Nancy Allen Professor of Writing and is also the fiction editor for Boston Review. He is active in the Dominican American community and is a founding member of the Voices of Our Nations Arts Writing Workshop, which focuses on writers of color. Díaz was a Millet Writing Fellow at Wesleyan University, in 2009, and participated in Wesleyan's Distinguished Writers Series.
Díaz is related to American journalist Nefertiti Jáquez. He lives in a domestic partnership with paranormal romance writer Marjorie Liu.
Díaz's short fiction has appeared in The New Yorker magazine, which listed him as one of the 20 top writers for the 21st century. He has been published in Story, The Paris Review, and in the anthologies The Best American Short Stories five times (1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2013), The PEN/O. Henry Prize Stories (2009), and African Voices. He is best known for his two major works: the short story collection Drown (1996) and the novel The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao (2007). Both were published to critical acclaim and he won the 2008 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for the latter. Diaz himself has described his writing style as "a disobedient child of New Jersey and the Dominican Republic if that can be possibly imagined with way too much education".
Díaz has received a Eugene McDermott Award, a fellowship from the John Simon Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, a Lila Wallace Reader's Digest Writers Award, the 2002 PEN/Malamud Award, the 2003 US-Japan Creative Artist Fellowship from the National Endowment for the Arts, a fellowship at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard University and the Rome Prize from the American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was selected as one of the 39 most important Latin American writers under the age of 39 by the Bogotá World Book Capital and the Hay Festival.
The stories in Drown focus on the teenage narrator's impoverished, fatherless youth in the Dominican Republic and his struggle adapting to his new life in New Jersey. Reviews were generally strong but not without complaints. Díaz read twice for PRI's This American Life: "Edison, New Jersey" in 1997 and "How to Date a Brown Girl (Black Girl, White Girl, or Halfie)" in 1998. Díaz also published a Spanish translation of' Drown, entitled Negocios. The arrival of his novel (The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao) in 2007 prompted a noticeable re-appraisal of Díaz's earlier work. Drown became widely recognized as an important landmark in contemporary literature—ten years after its initial publication—even by critics who had either entirely ignored the book or had given it poor reviews.
The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao was published in September 2007. New York Times critic Michiko Kakutani characterized Díaz's writing in the novel as:
a sort of streetwise brand of Spanglish that even the most monolingual reader can easily inhale: lots of flash words and razzle-dazzle talk, lots of body language on the sentences, lots of David Foster Wallace-esque footnotes and asides. And he conjures with seemingly effortless aplomb the two worlds his characters inhabit: the Dominican Republic, the ghost-haunted motherland that shapes their nightmares and their dreams; and America (a.k.a. New Jersey), the land of freedom and hope and not-so-shiny possibilities that they've fled to as part of the great Dominican diaspora.
Díaz said about the protagonist of the novel, "Oscar was a composite of all the nerds that I grew up with who didn't have that special reservoir of masculine privilege. Oscar was who I would have been if it had not been for my father or my brother or my own willingness to fight or my own inability to fit into any category easily." He has said that he sees a meaningful and fitting connection between the science fiction and/or epic literary genres and the multi-faceted immigrant experience.
Writing for Time, critic Lev Grossman said that Díaz's novel was "so astoundingly great that in a fall crowded with heavyweights—Richard Russo, Philip Roth—Díaz is a good bet to run away with the field. You could call The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao... the saga of an immigrant family, but that wouldn't really be fair. It's an immigrant-family saga for people who don't read immigrant-family sagas." In September 2007, Miramax acquired the rights for a film adaptation of The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao.
In addition to the Pulitzer, The Brief Wondrous life of Oscar Wao was awarded the John Sargent Sr. First Novel Prize, the National Book Critics Circle Award for Best Novel of 2007  the Anisfield-Wolf Book Awards, the 2008 Dayton Literary Peace Prize for Fiction, the 2008 Hurston-Wright Legacy Award, and the Massachusetts Book Awards Fiction Award in 2007. Díaz also won the James Beard Foundation's MFK Fisher Distinguished Writing Award for his article "He'll Take El Alto", which appeared in Gourmet, September 2007. The novel was also selected by Time and New York Magazine as the best novel of 2007. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Los Angeles Times, Village Voice, Christian Science Monitor, New Statesman, Washington Post, and Publishers Weekly were among the 35 publications that placed the novel on their 'Best of 2007' lists. The novel was the subject of a panel at the 2008 Modern Language Association conference in San Francisco. Stanford University dedicated a symposium to Junot Díaz in 2012, with roundtables of leading US Latino/a Studies scholars commenting on his creative writing and activism.
In February 2010, Díaz's contributions toward encouraging fellow writers were recognized when he was awarded the Barnes & Noble Writers for Writers Award, alongside Maxine Hong Kingston and poet M.L. Liebler.
In September 2012, he released a collection of short stories entitled This Is How You Lose Her. The collection was named a finalist for the 2012 National Book Award on October 10, 2012. In his review of the book on online arts and culture journal Frontier Psychiatrist, Editor-In-Chief Keith Meatto wrote, "While This is How You Lose Her will surely advance Diaz's literary career, it may complicate his love life. For the reader, the collection raises the obvious question of what you would do if your lover cheated on you, and implies two no less challenging questions: How do you find love and how do you make it last?"
A description of the book is as follows:
The stories in This Is How You Lose Her, by turns hilarious and devastating, raucous and tender, lay bare the infinite longing and inevitable weaknesses of our all-too-human hearts. They capture the heat of new passion, the recklessness with which we betray what we most treasure, and the torture we go through – "the begging, the crawling over glass, the crying" – to try to mend what we've broken beyond repair. They recall the echoes that intimacy leaves behind, even where we thought we did not care. They teach us the catechism of affections: that the faithlessness of the fathers is visited upon the children; that what we do unto our exes is inevitably done in turn unto us; and that loving thy neighbor as thyself is a commandment more safely honored on platonic than erotic terms. Most of all, these stories remind us that the habit of passion always triumphs over experience, and that "love, when it hits us for real, has a half-life of forever".
In 2012, Diaz received a $500,000 MacArthur "Genius grant" award. He said "I think I was speechless for two days" and called it "stupendous" and a "mind-blowing honor".
After Oscar Wao, Diaz began work on a second novel, a science-fiction epic with the working title Monstro. Diaz had previously attempted to write a science fiction novel twice prior to Oscar Wao, with earlier efforts in the genre "Shadow of the Adept, a far-future novel in the vein of Gene Wolfe's The Shadow of the Torturer, and Dark America, an Akira-inspired post-apocalyptic nightmare" remaining incomplete and unpublished. Part of the appeal of science fiction to Diaz, he explained in an interview with Wired, is that science fiction grapples with the idea of power in a manner other genres do not: "I didn't see mainstream, literary, realistic fiction talking about power, talking about dictatorship, talking about the consequences of breeding people, which of course is something that in the Caribbean is never far away." In an interview with New York Magazine prior to the release of This Is How You Lose Her, Diaz revealed that the work-in-progress novel concerns "a 14-year-old 'Dominican York' girl who saves the planet from a full-blown apocalypse". but he also warned that the novel may never be completed: "I'm only at the first part of the novel, so I haven't really gotten down to the eating," he says, "and I've got to eat a couple cities before I think the thing will really get going." As of June 2015, the novel-in-progress appears to be abandoned – in a June 2015 interview for Words on a Wire, when asked about his progress on Monstro, Diaz said "Yeah, I'm not writing that book anymore ..."
With regard to his own writing, Diaz has said: "There are two types of writers: those who write for other writers, and those who write for readers," and that he prefers to keep his readers in mind when writing, as they'll be more likely to gloss over his mistakes and act as willing participants in a story, rather than actively looking to criticize his writing.
A poll of US critics in January 2015 named Díaz’s The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao as "the best novel of the 21st century to date".
Díaz has been active in a number of community organizations in New York City, from Pro-Libertad, to the Communist Dominican Workers' Party (Partido de los Trabajadores Dominicanos), and the Unión de Jóvenes Dominicanos ("Dominican Youth Union"). He has been critical of immigration policy in the United States. With fellow author Edwidge Danticat, Díaz published an op-ed piece in The New York Times condemning the illegal deportation of Haitians and Haitian Dominicans by the Dominican government. After outwardly critiquing the revoking of citizenship for Haitian-Dominicans, Dominican officials lambasted the writer. The group questioned Diaz's Dominican-ness in an open letter published by digital publication 7 Días. The letter, signed by writers including Eduardo Gautreau de Windt, Pura Emeterio Rondón and Efraim Castillo, accuses Díaz of "not knowing the content and reach of the ruling, destined to organize the situation of immigrants and their descendants". The letter goes on to call Díaz's interest in the country of his birth "feigned," "unnecessary" and "offensive".
In October 2015, Eduardo Selman, the Consul General of the Dominican Republic in New York, called Junot an "anti-Dominican" and revoked the Order of Merit the Dominican Republic had awarded Diaz in 2009.
On May 22, 2010, it was announced that Díaz had been selected to sit on the 20-member Pulitzer Prize board of jurors. Díaz described his appointment, and the fact that he is the first of Latin background to be appointed to the panel, as an "extraordinary honor".
He is currently the honorary chairman of the DREAM Project, a non-profit education involvement program in the Dominican Republic.
The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao. New York: Riverhead, 2007. ISBN 978-1-59448-958-7
Monstro. New York: Riverhead, TBA
Drown. New York: Riverhead, 1996. ISBN 978-1-57322-041-5
This Is How You Lose Her. New York: Riverhead, 2012. ISBN 978-1-59448-736-1
"Homecoming, with Turtle" (The New Yorker, June 14, 2004)
"Summer Love, Overheated" (GQ, April 2008)
"One Year: Storyteller-in-Chief" (The New Yorker, January 20, 2010)
"Apocalypse: What Disasters Reveal" (Boston Review, May/June 2011)
"MFA vs. POC" (The New Yorker, April 30, 2014)
2002 PEN/Malamud Award
2008 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2007 Salon Book Award for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2007 National Book Critics Circle Award for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2007 Center for Fiction First Novel Prize for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2007 Los Angeles Times Book Prize (Fiction) finalist for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2008 Fellow of the American Academy Rome Prize
2008 Dayton Literary Peace Prize (Fiction) for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2008 Anisfield-Wolf Book Award (Fiction) for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2009 International IMPAC Dublin Literary Award shortlist for The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao
2012 MacArthur Fellowship
2012 National Book Award, finalist, This is How You Lose Her 
2012 Publishers Weekly Best Books, This is How You Lose Her
2012 Kansas City Star Top 100 Books, This is How You Lose Her
2012 New York Times 100 Notable Books, This is How You Lose Her
2012 Goodreads Choice Awards, Best Fiction, finalist, This is How You Lose Her
2012 Story Prize, finalist
2013 Sunday Times EFG Private Bank Short Story Award, winner, "Miss Lora" from This is How You Lose Her
2013 Frank O'Connor International Short Story Award longlist for This is How You Lose Her
2013 Andrew Carnegie Medal for Excellence in Fiction finalist (Fiction) for This is How You Lose Her
2013 Honorary Doctorate (Doctor of Letters), Brown University
2013 Norman Mailer Prize (Distinguished Writing)
Arrieta, Daniel. "El Spanglish en la obra de Junot Díaz: Instrucciones de uso". Hispánica 53 (2009): 105–126.
Cox, Sandra. "The Trujillato and Testimonial Fiction: Collective Memory, Cultural Trauma and National Identity in Edwidge Danticat's The Farming of Bones and Junot Díaz's The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao". Caminero- Santangelo and Osegueda 107–126.
Di Iorio Sandín, Lyn. "The Latino Scapegoat: Knowledge through Death in Short Stories by Joyce Carol Oates and Junot Díaz". Contemporary U.S. Latino/a Literary Criticism. Ed. Lyn Di Iorio Sandín and Richard Perez. New York: Palgrave- Macmillan, 2007. 15–34.
Finn, Ed. "Revenge of the Nerd: Junot Díaz and the Networks of American Literary Imagination". DHQ: Digital Humanities Quarterly 7.1 (2013).
Flores-Rodríguez, Daynalí. "Addressing Fukú in Us: Junot Díaz and the New Novel of Dictatorship". Caminero-Santangelo and Osegueda 91–106.
Gonzalez, Christopher. Reading Junot Diaz. (Latino and Latin American Profiles). Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. (2015)
Hanna, Monica. "'Reassembling the Fragments': Battling Historiographies, Caribbean Discourse, and Nerd Genres in Junot Díaz's The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao". Callaloo 33.2 (2010): 498–520.
Hanna, Monica and Harford Vargas, Jennifer, and Salvidar, Jose David (eds.). Junot Diaz and the Decolonial Imagination. Durham, NC and London: Duke University Press. (2016)
López-Calvo, Ignacio. "A Postmodern Plátano's Trujillo: Junot Díaz's The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao, More Macondo Than McOndo". Caminero-Santangelo and Osegueda 75–90.
Machado Sáez, Elena (2015), "Dictating Diaspora: Gendering Postcolonial Violence in Junot Díaz and Edwidge Danticat", Market Aesthetics: The Purchase of the Past in Caribbean Diasporic Fiction, Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, ISBN 978-0-8139-3705-2 .
Mahler, Anne Garland. "The Writer as Superhero: Fighting the Colonial Curse in Junot Díaz's The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao". Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies 19.2 (2010): 119–140.
McCracken, Ellen. Paratexts and Performance in the Novels of Junot Diaz and Sandra Cisneros. (Literatures of the Americas). Palgrave Macmillan. (2015)
