Hønefoss is a town in Buskerud county, Norway, and the center of the municipality of Ringerike. It is located 63 kilometres northwest by road from the Norwegian capital of Oslo.
In 1852, Hønefoss received town status and was separated from Norderhov. Hønefoss celebrated its 150th year of township in 2002. In 1964, Hønefoss ceased being a separate municipality and became part of Ringerike.
Hønefoss is located north of lake Tyrifjorden, where the river Begna forms the waterfall of Hønefossen, giving the town its name. Hønefoss is an industrial center of inner Østlandet, containing several factories and other industry. As of 1 January 2008, Hønefoss has 14,177 inhabitants.
The city is named after a waterfall in the Begna River. The first element is the name of the old farm Hønen (Norse *Hœnvin), the last element is foss m 'waterfall'. The name of the farm is a compound of a word *hœn- (with an unknown meaning) and vin f 'meadow'.
Hønefoss is home to several factories and other industry, with the Norske Skog Follum paper mill traditionally having had a significant impact on the town. The paper mill, one of the largest producers of newsprint in Europe, opened in 1873.
The paper mill closed in 2012.
Hønefoss BK is a football club that as of 2016 plays in Norwegian Second Division.
Frode Andresen, biathlete and a cross-country skier, Olympic gold medalist.
Gunn Margit Andreassen, biathlete and a cross-country skier, Olympic gold medalist.
Anders Jacobsen, ski jumper, the youngest Norwegian to have won the Four Hills Tournament.
Ringerikes Museum (Ringerikes Museum) is located in former Norderhov rectory. The museum is noted for its icon collection, its rune stones and its collection of the private belongings of Jørgen Engebretsen Moe. Jørgen Moe was a Norwegian author, who is best known for the Norske Folkeeventyr, a collection of Norwegian folk tales which he edited in collaboration with Peter Christen Asbjørnsen.
Norderhov rectory was the sight of the skirmish at Norderhov (Slaget på Norderhov). Late on the evening of 28 March 1716, an army of King Charles XII of Sweden was confronted by Norwegian forces. The Swedish troops had taken shelter in and by the old Norderhov rectory.Anna Colbjørnsdatter, the wife of pastor Jonas Danilssønn Ramus, sent an alert to Norwegians forces about the presence of the Swedes. The event itself was published by Peter Andreas Munch in his book Norges, Sveriges og Danmarks Historie til Skolebrug (1838).
On the north side of the town bridge is located Riddergården ("knight's estate"). This had been a patrician farm dating to 1730. This was the home of the manager of the local sawmill for generations.
Ringerikes Blad is a regional newspaper covering Ringerike, Hole and Jevnaker. Established in 1845, the newspaper is published daily in Hønefoss. As of 2006, the newspaper has a daily circulation of 12,684.
Hønefoss is connected to Bergen, Drammen and Oslo by the railway Bergensbanen, as well as to Gjøvik by Gjøvikbanen. European route E16 runs near Hønefoss on its way from Oslo to Bergen. It is approximately 65 km from both Oslo centre and Oslo Gardermoen.
Hønefoss Church (Norwegian: Hønefoss Kirke) burned down in 2010.
