Costa Mediterranea is a Spirit-class cruise ship operated by the Costa Crociere cruise line. She was constructed at the Kvaerner Masa-Yards (currently Aker Finnyards) in Helsinki, Finland at a cost of over €400 million. Like sister ship Costa Atlantica, her design was derived from the Carnival Cruise Lines Spirit-class ships, Carnival Spirit, Carnival Pride, Carnival Legend and Carnival Miracle. On June 16, 2003 she departed on her maiden voyage from Genoa to Spain and Portugal.
Public rooms aboard Costa Mediterranea such the ten floor high Maschera d'Argento atrium, were inspired by Italy's 16th and 17th century palazzi and decorated to reflect the ship's motto "Mai visto niente di simile" (You've never seen anything like it). The twelve decks are named after mythological and historical characters: Circe, Tersicore, Bacco, Teseo, Orfeo, Narciso, Prometeo, Pegaso, Armonia, Cleopatra, Pandora and Medea.
Four swimming pools, one with a retractable glass roof
Four open-air Jacuzzis
Beauty salon and spa
Three-story gym
Multi-purpose sports court
Three restaurants: Ristorante degli Argentieri (two-story main dining venue), Perla del Lago Buffet, Club Medusa (alternative dining venue)
14 Themed bars and lounges
Egyptian themed Osiris Theatre
Canal Grande Casino
Selva Discothèque
Squok Club children's facilities
Mondo Virtuale arcade
Library/Internet Cafe
Via Condotti shops
As part of Costa Cruises’ ongoing investment to improve the quality and sustainability of its fleet, Costa Mediterranea was dry docked at the Fincantieri shipyard in Palermo from November 21, 2013 to December 4 2013, for planned maintenance work. Costa Cruises’ invested more than €4 million to perform the routine refurbishment, which takes place approximately every two and a half years to keep the fleet fresh and modern. The renewal work included restoration of the ship’s hull, and a full renovation of the ship’s interior including the replacement of the carpets, curtains and upholstery. Specially for Costa Mediterranea Italian artist Gigi Rigamonti has produced an entire wall with Matisse-like dancers in the foyer of cruise ship.
On 10 September 2008 Costa Mediterranea was the first ship make a port call to the Passenger Port of St. Petersburg in Saint Petersburg, Russia.
