Ninh Bình ( listen) city is a small city in the Red River Delta of northern Vietnam; it is the capital of Ninh Bình Province.
Ninh Bình City is located in northern Vietnam comprising 48 square kilometres; the 2007 city population was 130,517.
During the period of undeclared hostilities in Tonkin that preceded the outbreak of the Sino-French War in August 1884, the allegiance of Ninh Bình was of considerable importance to the French, as artillery mounted in its lofty citadel controlled river traffic to the Gulf of Tonkin. Although the Vietnamese authorities in Ninh Bình made no attempt to hinder the passage of an expedition launched by Henri Rivière in March 1883 to capture Nam Dinh, they were known to be hostile towards the French. In November 1883, on the eve of the Sơn Tây Campaign, the French occupied the citadel of Ninh Bình without resistance and installed a garrison.
Tourism: (Ninh Binh province)
Ninh Bình province is a tourist center with many attractions:
Ancient capital of Hoa Lư, witnessed the crowd of King Dinh Tien Hoang (924-979), a hero who settled Twelve Warlords .Dinh Bo Linh was from Hoa Lu village. When he was a boy, he often used reed wool to hold field maneuver with other shepherds and practiced martial arts. Now King Dinh Tien Hoang Square is being built in the city in memorial of him , becoming a stunning tourist attraction.
Phát Diệm Cathedral, ranked as one of the most beautiful churchs in Vietnam, with a mixing Western-Eastern architecture. The church is a prominent historical object witnessing an important movement in Vietnam religion. It took 24 years to build this church from 1875 to 1898. And as its name suggests, it was completely built of stone and wood that are readily available in the mountain area of Ninh Binh.
Cuc Phuong National Park ;
Tam Cốc-Bích Động, with a numerous other caves made up a spectacular region for boat touring and cave exploring.
Tràng An Scenic Complex, a newly-discovered area for tourism with stunning and untouched beauty. Recently Titan Crew, aka King Kong movie making crew has visited Trang An for some of the most important scenes in "Kong: the Skull Island", on air in 2017.
Bái Đính Temple. currently holds the record for having the biggest Budda Statue in South East Asia.
Duc Thuy, aka Non Nuoc mountain is a unique attraction for its picturesque location and historical values. The mountain has long been a subject of creativity for hundred famous poets throughout history. There are many poetries writen in Nom ( Chinese-like letters), carved on the side of the mountain, being left by historical figures. The mountain is the famous symbol of the city, also of the province.
Recently Thung Nham bird garden has been known for more tourists. Resorts, bird viewing, boat tour, wooden house residing, along with many other services are available for tourists. Thung Nham is about fifty-minute drive from Tam Coc- Bich Dong.
In a couple of years Ninh Binh will have its own beach, also known as Con Noi Beach in Kim Son.
Economic: (Ninh Binh province)
Ninh Binh has great potential for developing building material production industry, with numerous cement manufacturers. The staple local products are bricks, stones, cement, steel,...and raw materials for other industries,
Besides, there are various other factories and munufacturing sites, for canned food and drink, clothes and shoes, ships or four-wheel vehicles building. Hand-crafting an
Ninh Binh flourishing industries receive attention from many investors, both domestic and international. The province has great protential to become one of the industrial-centred region in Red River Delta of Vietnam.
