Majuro, /ˈmædʒəroʊ/ (Marshallese: Mājro, [mʲæzʲ(ɛ͡ʌ)rˠɤ͡oo̯]), is the capital and largest city of the Republic of the Marshall Islands. It is also a large coral atoll of 64 islands in the Pacific Ocean. It forms a legislative district of the Ratak (Sunrise) Chain of the Marshall Islands. The atoll has a land area of 9.7 square kilometres (3.7 sq mi) and encloses a lagoon of 295 square kilometres (114 sq mi). As with other atolls in the Marshall Islands, Majuro consists of narrow land masses.
The main population center, named Delap-Uliga-Djarrit, DUD - three contiguous motus, had 20,301 people as of 2012. Majuro has a port, shopping district, hotels, and an international airport.
At the western end of the atoll, about 50 kilometres (30 mi) from D–U–D by road, is the island community of Laura, a growing residential area with a popular beach. Laura has the highest elevation point on the atoll, estimated at less than 3 metres (10 feet) above sea level.
Djarrit is mostly residential.
Being slightly north of the Equator, Majuro has a tropical climate with temperatures always above 21 °C (70 °F).
Humans have inhabited the atoll for at least 2,000 years.
Majuro Atoll was claimed by the German Empire with the rest of the Marshall Islands in 1884, and the Germans established a trading outpost. As with the rest of the Marshalls, Majuro was captured by the Imperial Japanese Navy in 1914 during World War I and mandated to the Empire of Japan by the League of Nations in 1920. The island then became a part of the Japanese mandated territory of Nanyo; although the Japanese had established a government in Nanyo, local affairs were mostly left in the hands of traditional local leaders until the start of World War II.
On January 30, 1944, United States troops invaded, but found that Japanese forces had evacuated their fortifications to Kwajalein and Enewetak about a year earlier. A single Japanese warrant officer had been left as a caretaker. With his capture, the islands were secured. This gave the U.S. Navy use of one of the largest anchorages in the Central Pacific. The lagoon became a large forward naval base of operations and was the largest and most active port in the world until the war moved westward when it was supplanted by Ulithi (Yap, Federated States of Micronesia).
Following World War II, Majuro came under the control of the United States as part of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands. It supplanted Jaluit Atoll as the administrative center of the Marshall Islands, a status that it retains after the independence of the Marshall Islands in 1986.
The major population centers are the D–U–D communities: the islets of Delap–Uliga–Djarrit (listed from south to north, on the eastern edge of the atoll). As of 2008, Majuro had a population of 27,797.
Most of the population is Christian. The majority follows the United Church of Christ. The Cathedral of the Assumption of the Roman Catholic Apostolic Prefecture of the Marshall Islands is located in Majuro.
Islamic influence has been increasing. There is a sizable number of Ahmadi Muslims. The first mosque opened in Majuro in September 2012.
Majuro's economy is driven by the service sector.
On September 15, 2007, Witon Barry, of the Tobolar Copra processing plant in the Marshall Islands' capital of Majuro, said power authorities, private companies and entrepreneurs had been experimenting with coconut oil as an alternative to diesel fuel for vehicles, power generators and ships. Coconut trees abound in the Pacific's tropical islands. Copra from 6 to 10 coconuts makes 1 litre of oil.
Air Marshall Islands has its headquarters in Majuro.
Housed in Uliga are the College of the Marshall Islands, Assumption High School, and Uliga Elementary School where English is taught to all students.
The Marshall Islands High School is near the north end of Majuro.
The University of South Pacific has a presence on Majuro.
Delap has the Seventh Day Adventist High School and Elementary School where English is taught to all students.
Majuro Hospital has 81 beds. It is the main hospital for Majuro, as well as many of the outer islands.
In 2006, infant mortality was 3.0%.
Average life expectancy at birth is 59 and 60 years for males and females respectively.
The Majuro Water and Sewer Company obtains water from a catchment on the International runway. It supplies 140,000,000 US gallons (530,000,000 l; 120,000,000 imp gal) a year or 14 US gallons (53 l; 12 imp gal) per person per day. This compares with New York City's 1,100 US gallons (4,200 l; 920 imp gal) per person per day. Water is supplied 12 hours daily. The threat of drought is commonplace.
Marshall Islands International Airport, offering domestic and international services, is on Majuro Atoll. It is served by four passenger airlines: United Airlines, Our Airline, Air Marshall Islands, and Asia Pacific Airlines.
Air Marshall Islands flies to most of the Marshalls' inhabited atolls once a week. It offers daily service between Majuro and Kwajalein except Thursdays and Sundays.
Majuro Lagoon is an active port. The Marshall Islands Shipping Corporation operates three ships (Aeaman, Langdrik, Ribuukae) and a landing craft (Jelejeletae). These vessels are the main link for transporting people and supplies to and from the outer islands.
Additionally, the lagoon acts as a harbor for commercial fishing vessels, cruisers, sport fishing boats, outrigger sailing canoes and the occasional luxury yacht.
Most of the roadway from Djarrit to Laura is a single two-lane paved road.
Majuro was initially scheduled to host the seventh edition of the Micronesian Games, in 2010. It subsequently renounced its hosting rights, citing a lack of adequate infrastructure.
Majuro is twinned with:
 Guam, since 1973
 Kawai, Japan
 Taipei, Taiwan, since 1999
