Heinsberg is a town in North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany. It is the seat of the district Heinsberg. It is situated near the border with the Netherlands, on the river Wurm, approx. 20 km north-east of Sittard and 30 km south-west of Mönchengladbach.
Wassenberg is the town to the North of Heinsberg, Hückelhoven to the east, Waldfeucht and Gangelt to the west, and Geilenkirchen to the south. Two rivers flow through Heinsberg, the Wurm and the Rur. The Wurm flows into the Rur near to Rurkempen, a village of Heinsberg municipality.
The city of Heinsberg has only some old houses. The most of the city is destroyed in 1944. The main sights are:
St. Gangolf church
Castle ruins
Old district court
Building assembly of Propstei, Torbogenhaus (former seat of the Amtmann of the Duchy of Jülich) and the former Haus Lennartz.
The railway from Heinsberg to Geilenkirchen-Lindern, on the Aachen–Mönchengladbach railway, has been reopened for passenger traffic in December 2013. Passenger traffic had been suspended in 1980. As of 2015, there is an hourly service from Heinsberg to Lindern, which continues to Aachen Hbf.
The main bus station of Heinsberg is next to the train station. It is served by buses to several towns and villages in the district, including Erkelenz, Geilenkirchen, Wegberg, Gangelt, Waldfeucht and Selfkant-Tüddern. There is one swift bus, the SB 1 from Erkelenz to Geilenkirchen via Heinsberg.
Heinsberg has two exits on the motorway A46 to Düsseldorf. The Bundesstraße 221 (Alsdorf - Straelen) passes through the town.
In the industry area of Heinsberg, and the industry area of Oberbruch (IPO) are many companies, very famous;
Enka Gmbh & Co KG
Hazet (tool company)
Sera Aquaristic
Heinsberger Newspaper
"Hs-Woche" a free weekly newspaper
The "Lokalzeit aus Aachen" a news broadcast from the WDR about Aachen and Heinsberg, too.
HS TV, a television transmitter
The radio transmitter "Welle West" was closed in 2007. Other radio stations, which include 100.5 and 107.8, provide news and weather reports for Heinsberg
Office of the district Heinsberg
Police (district)
the district court
health office
jail
In Heinsberg possesses many elementary schools and kindergartens. There are two "Hauptschulen" and "Realschulen". There is a high school ("Gymnasium") in Heinsberg. Since 2007 there is a school for handicaped persons in the building of the former vocational school ("Berufschule").
