Wärtsilä /ˈværtsilæ/ is a Finnish corporation which manufactures and services power sources and other equipment in the marine and energy markets. The core products of Wärtsilä include large combustion engines used in cruise ships and ferries. As of 2014 the company employed close to 18,000 workers in more than 70 countries and it is headquartered in Helsinki.
Wärtsilä has three main businesses; Energy Solutions focusing on the energy market, Marine Solutions focussing on the marine market and Services which is supporting both markets. Wärtsilä operates globally but its Ship Power division is heavily focused on Asia.
The company services the merchant, offshore, cruise and ferry, naval, and special vessel markets, and the offering includes ship design, main and auxiliary engines, auxiliary power systems, electrical and automation packages, propulsors (such as water jets, thrusters, propellers, and nozzles), seals, bearings, gears, rudders, scrubbers, boilers, and all related services, such as repair, configuration, upgrading, training, maintenance, and environmental services. Wärtsilä’s biggest competitors in the marine market are MAN Diesel & Turbo, Caterpillar Inc. and Rolls-Royce plc.
Customers comprise both shipyards and ship owners. Wärtsilä Ship Power delivers everything from a single product to entire lifecycle support, from initial building to operational use, of complex systems powering ships.
The environmental services range from reduction of air emissions, such as NOx, SOx, CO, and volatile organic compounds (VOCs), to oily waste water treatment and other water solutions.
Wärtsilä was an important Finnish shipbuilder 1935–1989, building e.g. cruiseferries and a large share of the icebreakers of the world. The shipyards are now owned by Meyer Werft.
Wärtsilä is a provider of power plants in distributed and flexible power generation.
Their product portfolio consists of installations up to 500 MW, running on most fossil fuels, such as natural gas, liquefied natural gas (LNG), different types and qualities of fuel oils, and renewable fuels like biogas and biofuel. In addition for the reliability of traditional base power generation, the engines have the capability to start and stop quickly and they maintain their efficiency in part load, which makes them well suited for peaking power production, smart grids, and emergency power systems. They can also utilize the combined cycle and cogeneration to produce steam or hot water for heating, and trigeneration for chilled water, which can be used for air conditioning.
Wärtsilä also provides products and services for grid stability management, utilization of gas flares, pumping applications (such as pump and compression drives), financial services, and project management services for projects concerning power generation.
Wärtsilä’s biggest competitors in the energy market are mainly gas turbine manufacturers like General Electric and Siemens.
In 2006, Wärtsilä delivered the Dr. Bird II, a 49.5 MW power barge, to accompany Dr. Bird I (delivered in 1995) in Jamaica. These barges produce in total 123.6 MW and are now owned by Jamaica Energy Partners.
The wholly owned service network consist of over 5,000 field services professionals in more than 160 locations in over 70 countries globally, with the installed base of over 180 000 MW. The focus lies on optimising operations and lifecycle performance of land based power plants and ship installations.
Wärtsilä provides services, spare parts, maintenance, upgrades, and fuel conversions solutions for medium and low-speed gas and diesel engines and other related systems, propulsion systems, electrical & automation systems boilers including environmental solutions regarding particulates and NOx, covering scrubber, selective catalytic reduction (SCRs), oxidation catalysts, ballast water treatment systems and oily-water systems, long-term service agreements, training, condition monitoring, and condition-based maintenance and advisory services.
Wärtsilä produces a wide range of low- and medium-speed diesel, gas and dual- and multi-fuel engines for marine propulsion, electricity generation on board ships and for land-based power stations. The engine models are generally identified by the cylinder bore diameter in centimeters, which as of 2012 range from 20 to 64 centimetres (7.9 to 25.2 inches) for medium-speed and 35 to 96 centimetres (14 to 38 inches) for low-speed engines. The smallest engine series, four-stroke medium-speed Wärtsilä 20, produces a modest 200 kW (270 hp) per cylinder while the largest, two-stroke low-speed Wärtsilä RT-flex96C, has a maximum output of 5,720 kW (7,670 hp) per cylinder. In addition, Wärtsilä also produces the most powerful medium-speed engine series in the world, Wärtsilä 64, with an output of 2,150 kW (2,880 hp) per cylinder. Depending on the engine model, Wärtsilä offers medium-speed engines in both straight and V configurations with the number of cylinders ranging from four (4L20) to twenty (20V46F), and low-speed engines in inline configuration with five (5RT-flex35) to fourteen cylinders (14RT-flex96C). The most powerful low-speed engine produced by Wärtsilä, a 14-cylinder version of the RT-flex96C, produces 80,080 kW (107,390 hp) and is used to propel the Mærsk E-class container ships.
Wärtsilä admitted emissions fraud in 2016, with a few hundred engines affected.
Board of Directors
Mikael Lilius, Chairman of the Board; Kaj-Gustaf Bergh, Deputy Chairman of the Board; Maarit Aarni-Sirviö; Sune Carlsson; Alexander Ehrnrooth; Paul Ehrnrooth; Gunilla Nordström; Markus Rauramo; Matti Vuoria;
Board of Management
Jaakko Eskola, President and CEO; Pierpaolo Barbone, Deputy to the CEO and President, Services & Executive Vice President; Päivi Castrén, Executive Vice President, Human Resources; Kari Hietanen, Executive Vice President, Corporate Relations and Legal Affairs; Roger Holm, President, Ship Power & Executive Vice President; Atte Palomäki, Executive Vice President, Communications & Branding; Javier Cavada Camino, President, Power Plants & Executive Vice President; Marco Wirén, Executive Vice President and CFO;
Key figures of Jan-Dec 2014:
Order intake – EUR 4.084 million (4.821 ), 5%
Order book – EUR 4 530 million (4.311 ), 5%
Net sales – EUR 4 779 million (4.607), 4%
Operating result – EUR 569 million (557), 11.9% of net sales (12.1)
Earnings per share – 1.72 euro (1.98)
Cash flow from operating activities EUR 452 million (578)
All numbers are shown excluding non-recurring items and selling profits.
2013: Wärtsila to build and service world’s biggest tri-fuel plant in Jordan.
2012: Wärtsilä acquires Hamworthy plc, a UK-listed engineering company focussed on the marine and oil and gas sectors
2011: Wärtsilä opens its global logistics center at Kampen, the Netherlands
2010: Majority of the propeller production and auxiliary engine production was moved to China
2009: Wärtsilä joins UN Global Compact, the world's largest corporate social responsibility initiative
2008: Wärtsilä acquires the global ship design group Vik-Sandvik and Conan Wu & Associates Pte Ltd (CWA), a leading naval architecture and ship design company in Singapore
2007: Wärtsilä Ship Power was reorganised into five Ship Power customer segments: Merchant, Offshore, Cruise&Ferry, Navy, and special vessels
2006: The Ciserv-group was integrated into the Wärtsilä Services organisation and discontinued brand names Ciserv and Sulzer
2005: Wärtsilä acquires DEUTZ-marine large-engine service business
2003: Wärtsilä Ltd is caught up in Sweden's largest-ever bribery prosecution; Wärtsilä found not guilty in all instances in the so-called Gotland case
2004: Wärtsilä’s Chinese propeller company started production
2002: The Ciserv-group, led by Pierpaolo Barbone, expanded in Singapore, Denmark, and Canada. Wärtsilä acquired John Crane-Lips, which operates within Wärtsilä under the name Wärtsilä Propulsion
2001: Wärtsilä sells its holding in Sanitec and takes ownership of service companies Ciserv AB and Sermet Oy
2000: Wärtsilä NSD and John Crane-Lips sign an alliance; Metra group is renamed Wärtsilä Corporation
1999: The split of the Cummins-Wärtsilä joint venture
1997: In April, Wärtsilä Diesel absorbed the former Switzerland-based Sulzer Brothers Ltd. division called New Sulzer Diesel (NSD) to form Wärtsilä NSD. The reference to the name "Sulzer" is until the first quarter of 2006 used in the designation of engines Wärtsilä inherited from NSD. Wärtsilä NSD Corporation is created
1995: Wärtsilä Diesel and Cummins Engine Company Inc. set up joint venture Cummins-Wärtsilä
1991: Imatra Steel is created when Ovako AB is split up between its owners, Metra and SKF
1990: Merged into Lohja Corporation, later renamed Metra Corporation
1989: Bankruptcy of Wärtsilä Marine - the biggest bankruptcy in Northern Europe until then
1989: Wärtsilä Diesel acquires SACM and Stork Werkspoor B.V. This company is renamed Stork-Wärtsilä Diesel B.V.
1988: Wärtsilä India quoted on the Bombay Stock Exchange
1986: Wärtsilä India is set up in India
1984: Quoted on the London Stock Exchange
1981: Manufactured hovercraft Larus
1978: Acquisition of 51% of the NOHAB diesel business, the remaining shares are acquired in 1984
1965: The company is renamed Oy Wärtsilä Ab
1938: Wärtsilä signs a licence agreement and the first diesel engine is built in Turku, Finland, in 1942
1936: Acquisition of the Onkilahti engineering workshop in Vaasa
1898: The sawmill and iron works company is renamed Wärtsilä Ab
1834: Establishment in Värtsilä. The Finnish part of the town now currently belongs to Tohmajärvi municipality
Finnish Maritime Cluster
Värtsilä
