The Battle of Tabouk (also called the Battle of Tabuk) was a military expedition, which, was initiated by Muhammad in October, AD 631,8 AH. in response to a Byzantine buildup to attack Medina. Muhammad led a force of as many as 30,000 north to Tabouk in present-day northwestern Saudi Arabia, and managed to capture Tabouk from the Byzantines.
According to Tabari: After consolidating his grip over south and east Mohammad planed this war for two main reasons: One it was a strategic place of transportation city and second reason which "later on was clear" to demolish the largest temple of Lat Uzza and Manat the 3 doughters of Allah which he later on demanded.
All the Muslims as well as allies of Muhammad, received an urgent call to join the campaign. But the Arabs of the desert showed little interest. Many came up with excuses not to participate. Muhammad provided incentives to persuade the Arabs to join, and provided many with gifts.
The Muslim scholar Ibn Kathir mentions in his tafsir that the Quran verse [Quran 9:49] was revealed about the people who make excuses not to participate in the Jihad. In this case Al-Jadd bin Qays made an excuse not participate in the Battle of Tabuk, and Ibn Kathir says that [Quran 9:49] verse was revealed because of his excuse.  The verse states: "Among them is (many) a man who says: "Grant me exemption and draw me not into trial." Have they not fallen into trial already? and indeed Hell surrounds the Unbelievers (on all sides)"
Ibn Kathir stated that verse 9:81 was also revealed about the Battle of Tabuk, regarding those who made excuses
Ibn Kathir also mentions that verse [Quran 9:29] which called for fighting against the people of the book till they pay Jizyah was revealed while Muhammad was preparing for the Battle of Tabuk. The verse states:
Ibn Kathir's commentary on this verse is as follows:
Muhammad and his forces marched northwards to Tabouk in Rajab 9 AH. After arriving at Tabouk and camping there, the Muhammad's army was prepared to face the Byzantines. However the Byzantines were not at Tabouk. They stayed there for a number of days and scouted the area but they never came.
Nevertheless, this expedition brought, in itself, credit to the Muslim forces that had gained military reputation in the remote lands of the Arabian Peninsula. The strategic long term consequence of the battle was that many Arab tribes now abandoned the Byzantines and joined with Muhammad, enlarging the Muslim state.
According to Saif ur-Rahman Mubarakpuri, many verses of Surah Tawbah (chapter 9 of the Quran) are related to the Battle of Tabuk. The Muslim scholar Ibn Kathir mentions that verses 9:42-48, 9:49, 9:81, and 9:29 are all related to the Battle of Tabuk or where revealed during the Battle of Tabuk.
