A helicopter carrier is a type of aircraft carrier whose primary purpose is to operate helicopters. Helicopter carriers have been used as anti-submarine warfare carriers and amphibious assault ships.
Helicopter carriers can either have a full-length aircraft deck like HMS Ocean, or have a large helicopter deck, usually aft, as in the Soviet Navy's Moskva class, the Chinese Navy's Type 0891A or RFA Argus. A full-length deck maximises deck space for helicopter landing spots. Such a design also allows for a hangar deck.
Pure helicopter carriers are difficult to define in the 21st century. The advent of STOVL aircraft such as the Harrier Jump Jet have complicated the classification; the United States Navy's Wasp class, for instance, carries six to eight Harriers as well as over 20 helicopters. Only smaller carriers unable to operate the Harrier and older pre-Harrier-era carriers can be regarded as true helicopter carriers. In many cases, other carriers, able to operate STOVL aircraft, are classified as "light aircraft carriers". Other vessels, such as the Wasp class, are also capable of embarking troops such as marines and landing them ashore; they are classified as amphibious assault ships.
HMS Hermes and two of her sisters were 22,000 ton fleet carriers converted to "commando carriers" only able to operate helicopters. Hermes was later converted to a STOVL carrier.
USS Iwo Jima (United States Navy) - the lead ship of the Iwo Jima class
HMS Bulwark, HMS Albion, (Royal Navy) - helicopter carriers of the 1960s-1980s
Moskva class (Soviet Navy)
Vittorio Veneto class (Italian Marina Militare)
Jeanne d'Arc (French Navy, decommissioned in 2010)
USCGC Cobb (WPG-181) (US Coast Guard, decommissioned in 1946) - World's first helicopter carrier.
HMS Illustrious (Royal Navy) An Invincible-class light aircraft carrier, which operated as a helicopter carrier when HMS Ocean was being refitted.
Mistral class amphibious assault ship. Originally two ships were under construction for the Russian Navy but As of September 23, 2015, the two Mistral ships are to be sold to Egypt; after cancellation of deal with Russia by France due to Russia's involvement in Ukraine.
Izumo-class helicopter destroyer The Japan Maritime Self Defense Force launched JDS Kaga (DDH-184) on August 27, 2015 in efforts to replace the aging helicopter destroyer Shirane-class JDS Kurama. The carrier is set to be commissioned in March 2017.
Amphibious assault ship
ASW carrier
Landing Platform Helicopter
Light aircraft carrier
 Media related to Helicopter carrier at Wikimedia Commons