Debaltseve (Ukrainian: Деба́льцеве Debálʼtseve, Russian: Деба́льцево Debálʼtsevo) is a city in the Donetsk Oblast (province) of Ukraine. Administratively, it is incorporated as a city of oblast significance. The city is situated on the eastern edge of Donetsk Oblast, and borders Luhansk Oblast. In January 2014, the population was estimated at 25,525. On 18 February 2015, after the Battle of Debaltseve, the town was captured by separatists forces from the Donetsk People's Republic.
Distance from Donetsk: by road - 74 km, by air – 58 km. Distance from Kiev: by road - 803 km, by rail - 797 km.
The administrative boundary between the Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts lies along the eastern limits of the city.
The city is located on a hill from which many Donbass rivers originate.
In the southern outskirts of the city there is the source of the river Bulavin (a tributary of the river Krynka, Mius basin).
In the north-eastern surroundings there is the source of the river Lozova (a tributary of the river Lugan, Seversky Donets basin).
In the north there is the source of the river Sanzharivka (a tributary of the river Lugan).
To the north-west there is the source of the river Skelevaya (a tributary of the river Lugan).
In the western outskirts of the city there is the source of the river Karapulka (a tributary of the river Lugan).
North: Sanzharivka, Novogrigorivka.
North-West: Nizhne Lozove, Logvinove.
North-East: Vergulivka, Komisarivka, Borzhikivka – Luhansk oblast.
West: Kommuna, Kalinivka.
East: Chernukhine, Kruglik, Depreradivka – Luhansk oblast.
South-West: Bulavine, Savelivka, Hrozne.
South-East: Ridkodub (of Bakhmut district), Ridkodub (of Shakhtarsk district).
South: Illinka.
The "Centre" district occupies the central part of the city. Here the main administrative agencies are located - the City Council and the Executive Committee, the police department, the city communications centre and others. The railway station, locomotive depot and passenger carriage depot are also located here.
The "Cheriomushki" district is located in the western part of the city. It was built in the 1970s on drained swamps. It consists of four- and five-story buildings. The district comprises Debaltseve College of Transport Infrastructure (currently non-operational), a secondary school № 4, a kindergarten № 4, and an Oschadbank office. On the outskirts of the district the Railway Hospital is located.
The Ryazantseva (local name - "Ryazan") settlement named in honor of the Civil War hero F.A. Ryazantsev and is located in the southeast of Debaltseve. The Znamyanka-Luhansk-Izvarine (M-04) highway passes through the settlement. The area consists of private houses. Here you can find a secondary school № 2. The Salty valley (Russian: Солёная Solyonaya) acts as a natural boundary to the east.
The Factory (Russian: Заводской Zavodskoi) settlement is one of the oldest districts of the city. It was founded in the late ХІХ century next to a mechanical factory. In Soviet times it was gentrified and landscaped. It consists of two- and five-story buildings. The city sanitary-epidemiological station, Centre for Culture and Leisure (former factory Cultural Palace), an Ukrtelecom office, a kindergarten and a stadium "Avangard" are all located here.
The Tolstova (local name - "Tolstovka") settlement in the eastern outskirts of the city, is named after A.N. Tolstoy, Soviet writer who in "The Frosty Night" (Russian: “Морозная ночь” “Moroznaya Noch”) described the events in Debaltseve station during the Civil War. The settlement consists of private buildings. There is the Central City Hospital and the Hill of Glory (Russian: Холм Славы Holm Slavi) in the area.
The "Eastern" (Russian: “Восточный” “Vostochniy”) district is one of the "youngest" districts of the city and consists of typical five-story buildings. According to a planned project the district should have been merged with another, the “50th anniversary of the Victory”. However this was never followed through. A school, № 1, a kindergarten and a vocational training school can be found here. A pilot heating project was implemented resulting in the construction of an electric boiler house.
The Konyaeva settlement bears the name of N.N. Konyaev - a hero of two revolutions who on December 28, 1917 was shot dead on a platform of Debaltseve railway station. The settlement consists of private buildings and stretches along the railway. There is a city bakery and also both City & Railway Fire Stations in this district.
The “50th anniversary of the Victory” (Russian: 50 лет Победы Pyatdesyat let Pobedi) microdistrict consists of mixed buildings. Multi-storey buildings in the north of the district graduate into smaller private dwellings. The neighbourhood is on north-eastern outskirts of Debaltseve. The district is closely connected to the adjacent railway companies. There are a secondary school, № 6, a kindergarten and a militarized security facility of Donetsk railway in this district. It is also known as a train stop “The First Platform" (Russian: “Первая площадка” “Pervaya Ploschadka”).
The "Festival" (Russian: Фестивальный Festivaniy) microdistrict is a “young” district which is located in the north of the city and consists of multi-storey buildings. There are many railway facilities (a carriage sorting depot, an asphalt factory, a track machine station № 9 (Russian: ПМС-9 PMS-9), a meteorological station, a sports complex "We", and train stops "Wheel" and "Meteorological" in this area.
The "March 8" (Russian: 8 Марта Vosmoye Marta) settlement is adjacent to the railway. The settlement is the northern outskirts of Debaltseve consisting of private houses. It is one of the most remote areas from the centre of the city. There is a school, № 7, a kindergarten and a Mechanical track repairing factory (Russian: КРМЗ KRMZ) in this settlement.
The Oktyabrskiy (Russian: Октябрьский посёлок) settlement is on the north-eastern outskirts of Debaltseve. It is the most distant district from the centre of the city. The settlement has railway branch lines to Chernukhine and Luhansk, and an access road to the Znamyanka-Luhansk-Izvarine (M-04) highway. A locomotive depot Debaltseve-Sorting is also located here The settlement is locally known as “The Second Platform" (Russian: “Вторая площадка” “Vtoraya Ploschadka”) train stop.
The city was established in 1878 when a Donetsk Railway station was opened. The town's railway station is a local landmark.
The city's population grew from about 9,500 in 1923 to about 34,000 by 1939. It dropped from 35,511 in 1989 to 30,246 in 2001, and dropped further to 25,987 by 2013. By February 2015, all but about 3,000 civilians had fled due to the War in Donbass.
Starting in mid-April 2014, pro-Russian separatists established control of a significant part of Donetsk Oblast, including Debaltseve. On 26 July 2014 the city saw heavy fighting. On July 28, 2014, Ukrainian forces recaptured control of Debaltseve from Donbass separatists. In January 2015, Debaltseve, located in a pocket of Ukrainian control, came under heavy bombardment from the separatists' forces. The population was partially evacuated. The Ukrainian forces left Debaltseve on 18 February 2015, as rebel forces seized control of the city. The population tha fled to other parts of Ukraine later returned, while those that fled to Russia remained on the other side of the border as they had been resettled by the time the battle was over.
Native language as of the Ukrainian Census of 2001:
Russian 81.5%
Ukrainian 16.9%
Romani 0.3%
Belarusian 0.1%
According to the 2001 population census, the ethnic composition of Debaltseve was:
Ukrainians: 64.4%
Russians: 32.6%
Belarusians: 0.7%
Romani: 0.3%
