Glamoč (Serbian Cyrillic: Гламоч) is a town and municipality in southwestern Bosnia and Herzegovina, in Canton 10 of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The town is situated at the foot of the hills of Staretina and Velika Golija on the edge of the central part of the Glamoč Field. The municipality encompasses town of Glamoč as a seat of the municipality and more than 50 villages situated along the Field.
The settlement was first named Delmoč, then Dlamoč and eventually Glamoč. The old names possibly derives from the Illyrian word delma meaning sheep. Accordingly, the name of town indicates the area of shepherds, or a place suitable for sheep farming. Another theory holds that Glamoč comes from the word glama, meaning "rocky hill".
During the Ottoman era the town was recorded as Biograd (White town), Belgradčik and Biogradaz.
The climate of Glamoč is classified as an oceanic climate (Cfb in Köppen climate classification system), near the boundary of the humid continental climate. Glamoč has four separate seasons. Summers are warm, and winters are cold, without a discernible dry season.
• Babića Brdo • Biličić • Crni Vrh • Ćirići • Ćoslije • Dolac • Dragnjić • Dubrave • Đuličan • Glamoč • Glavica • Halapić • Hasanbegovci • Hasići • Hotkovci • Hozići • Hrbine • Isakovci • Jakir • Kamen • Karajzovci • Karlovac • Kopić • Korićna • Kovačevci • Krasinac • Malkočevci • Malo Selo • Maslina Strana • Mladeškovci • Odžak • Opačić • Perduhovo Selo • Petrovo Vrelo • Podglavica • Podgradina • Podgreda • Potkraj • Popovići • Pribelja • Prijani • Radaslije • Rajićke • Reljino Selo • Rore • Rudine • Skucani • Staro Selo • Stekerovci • Šumnjaci • Vagan • Vidimlije • Vrba • Zaglavica • Zajaruga
Area of Glamoč has been inhabited at least since Neolithic times. In the late Bronze Age, the Neolithic population was replaced by more warlike Indo-European tribes known as the Illyrians. The region was inhabited by Illyrian tribe of Dalmatae. Their capital was Delminium which was located in today's Tomislavgrad. The Dalmatae left many remains that testify about their presence in this area. The most important remains are the gradine, remains of Illyrian settlements which were distributed along the Glamoč field. 34 gradinas were found on the territory of Glamoč. The settlements were strategically well placed, that is why the Romans took over 200 years to occupy this region.
After the Roman conquest, municipium has been established in this area that was located in the Roman province of Dalmatia. The most important of them is Salvium that existed in Illyrian times. Salvium is located 6 km away from town of Glamoč. The early Christian basilica was discovered on the territory of Salvium. The basilica was built in the 6th century, probably on the remains of a Roman temple. North from Glamoč second basilica was built, probably at the same time when the basilica in Salvium was built. In the beginning this basilicas belonged to the diocese of Salona. In 533 they became part of newly established diocese in Ludrum (Knin, Croatia). Basilicas were probably destroyed during the invasion of Avars in 597.
With the collapse of Roman rule in the 5th century, first barbarian tribes and then the Byzantine Empire occupied this region. In the seventh century Croats arrived and settled here. They brought Slavic culture and customs that have gradually merged with the Illyrian culture. Community was granted status of parish (župa) in the County of Hlivno after Tomislav established Kingdom of Croatia in 925. Therefore, the town, by the end of the 10th century, had developed all the infrastructure necessary for acquiring the status of the parish. In 1078 it was mentioned as boundary parish of Archdiocese of Split.
Church of Virgin Mary was built. Nearby the town, the church of St. Catherine and the Franciscan Monastery of St. Elias were built. Within the monastery Church of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary was located. The church was mentioned in 1446 when Pope Eugene IV gave it particular forgiveness. The remains of the churches were found in several surrounding villages which indicates the dense population of the area. Bosnian ban Stjepan II Kotromanić conquered Glamoč and neighboring towns, Hlivno and Dlmno (Tomislavgrad) in 1326. Since then this area has been called Tropolje, meaning three fields, or Završje. Until 1357 Glamoč was possession of Hrvatinić noble family.
During the Bosnian-Hungarian war in 1357, Bosnian ban Tvrtko ceded Tropolje to the Hungarian king Louis I the Great. That same year, Grgur Stjepanić was mentioned as Lord of Glamoč. He, along with other nobles of Tropolje rebelled against the Bosnian ban so Glamoč remained under Hungarian rule until 1387. In the meantime, the ban Tvrtko was crowned as the King of Bosnia and with the help of Hrvoje Vukčić Hrvatinić he regain this area. At the end of the 14th century, Pavao Maštrović Klešić became Lord of Glamoč. Bosnian King Stjepan Ostoja took his lordship, but when he needed Pavao as ally he returned it to him in 1404.
Glamoč fell under Ottoman rule about the year 1515. In 1516 it was mentioned as a nahiye Dlamoč or Belgrad in the kadiluk of Neretva. It remained part of the Bosnia Sanjak until 1537. In 1550 and 1574 it was recorded as nahiye in the Skradin kadiluk in the Sanjak of Klis. After Klis and parts of Sanjak of Klis was liberated in 1648, Glamoč became part of the Livno kadiluk.
During the Ottoman period the town was called Biograd or Belgradčik. Under this name it is recorded until 1833. A Venetian-Dalmatian source from the first half of the 17th century recorded that Biogradaz is a fortress with several towers. In the second half of the 18th century, it was noted that town lies along the Dalmatian border, and that the it is well fortified, but that has little artillery. Fortress was abandoned in 1851 and partially demolished in 1882.
In 1878 with the Congress of Berlin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, including Glamoč came under the Austro-Hungarian rule. Complete annexation followed in 1908. Administratively town was located in the Travnik District. At that time, a significant number of Catholics, mostly from Dalmatia, immigrated. So Catholic church of Saint Elias was built in 1903.
After the end of World War I and the dissolution of Austria-Hungary, province of Bosnia and Herzegovina, along with Glamoč, became a part of the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs and soon thereafter Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. After the Vidovdan Constitution of 1921 established new administrative division town became part Travnik County. The country changed its name to the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in 1929, and the Glamoč became the part of new administrative unit, Vrbas Banovina.
On 9 January 1992, the Bosnian Serb Assembly adopted a declaration on the Proclamation of the Republic of the Serb people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 28 February 1992, the Constitution of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina was adopted and declared that the state's territory included Serb autonomous regions, municipalities, and other Serbian ethnic entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including Glamoč where Bosnian Serbs made 79% of population.
In January and February 1992 many Bosniaks and Bosnian Croats left Glamoč. Those who remained suffered at the hands of the Serb forces. An early victim was a Croatian physician, Dr Alojzije Kelava, who was murdered in the city center on 24 February 1992 by Petar Vrakela, member of the Army of Republika Srpska.
Shortly thereafter, Serbian forces started ethnic cleansing of the non-Serb population and the destruction of the Bosnian-Herzegovinian cultural and historical heritage. In 1992, the Catholic church, the rectory and town's mosque were destroyed. The parish priest of Glamoč, Rev Zvonimir Matijević, was arrested and taken to Knin prison where he was tortured.
From the area of Glamočko field, Serbs besieged and bombarded nearby Livno. By early 1995, most of the non-Serb population had left the area of the municipality. On 25 July 1995, Croatian Army (HV) and Croatian Defence Council (HVO) began Operation Summer '95. In the next few days a large part of the Serbian population left the Glamoč led by the Serbian army. On 29 July, HVO troops attacking from the south captured the town.
Soon, the area was inhabited by refugees from Republika Srpska and central Bosnia. Some remained in Glamoč. Meanwhile, some of Croats and Muslims who left Glamoč at the beginning of the war and Serbs who left Glamoč after Croatian Army captured it, have returned. After the signing of the Dayton Agreement, Glamoč became municipality of Canton 10, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. This war has caused economic and demographic decline of the municipality. Large funds are invested in the reconstruction of destroyed infrastructure, but the area is still underdeveloped.
The main local government of the municipality is Municipal Council of Glamoč (Bosnian: Općinska skupština; Croatian: Općinsko vijeće; Serbian Latin: Opštinska skupština). Council has 15 members elected for a four-year term by proportional representation. Glamoč also has its municipal mayor who is the highest-ranking officer in the municipal government.
Pavao Posilović, Roman Catholic bishop and writer
Vule Trivunović, footballer
Miroslav Čangalović, opera singer
Zdravko Tolimir, commander in the Army of Republika Srpska
Obrad Piljak, politician
Slavko Zagorac, retired footballer and manager
Milutin Morača, People's Hero of Yugoslavia
Dušan Ćubić, People's Hero of Yugoslavia
Avdo Ćuk, People's Hero of Yugoslavia
Vladislav Mitrović, archbishop of Serbian Orthodox Church
Nedim Filipović, Yugoslavian philologist
Ešref Kovačević, Bosnian philologist
Senada Krgo, Bosnian actress
Dušan Jakišić, Serbian actor
Zaim Topčić, Yugoslavian writer
Stojan Srdić, Serbian writer
Milivoj Srebro, Bosnian philologist
Sulejman Filipović, WWII military officer, politician
Todor Petrović, Serbian footballer
Pavao Posilović,Franciscan writer and bishop
Ivo Lola Ribar, Yugoslav communist was killed near Glamoč by airstrike
Nemanja Radoja, Serbian footballer has family origin from Glamoč
Glamoč Fortress
Church of Saint Elias, Glamoč
Canton 10
