Nova Gradiška is a city located in the Brod-Posavina County of Croatia, population 14,229 (2011). It is located in the historic region of Slavonia, near the border to Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The first word in the name means New, and there's also an Old Gradiška nearby, the town of Stara Gradiška.
Nova Gradiška is often referred to as The Youngest City.
The city of Nova Gradiška was founded in 1748 as an outpost in the Military Frontier and was first named Friedrichsdorf in German. Already in 1750 it was renamed to Neu-Gradischka which later became Nova Gradiška in Croatian language. The Hungarian name is Újgradiska.
Before 1881, Nova Gradiška (named NEU-GRADISKA before 1850) was part of the Austrian monarchy (Kingdom of Croatia-Slavonia after the compromise of 1867), in the Slavonian Military Frontier, Gradiskaner Regiment N°VIII.
The first building constructed was the church of Saint Tereza, which is an important monument of baroque architecture in Slavonija. The old core of the town comprises the church of Saint Terezija and the old court and prison from the 18th century.
Between 1881 and 1918, Nova Gradiška was a district capital in the Požega County of the Kingdom.
The town is located near the Croatian most important railway line frequently served by passenger trains. The highway A3 is also passing nearby. Highway and railway are part of the Pan European corridor X. Bus traffic within the town as also suburban traffic is very well developed. There are also direct connections to Požega and nearby crossing to Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the vicinity of a few kilometers.
The administrative area of Nova Gradiška includes the following settlements:
Kovačevac, population 669
Ljupina, population 987
Nova Gradiška, population 11,821
Prvča, population 752
Here are several hotels and other tourist resourts present. The Tourist board is also present and well developed in Nova Gradiška. There are a number of townfaires. Some of the most important ones are:
Carnival festivities "Pokladne svečanosti"
Flower show "Izložba cvijeća"
The Folklore Show ("međužupanijska smotra folklora")
The display of traditional wind instruments ("smotra tradicijskih puhačkih instrumenata")
Nova Gradiška Music Summer ("Novogradiška glazbeno Ljeto")
Oldtimer car meeting ("susreti oldtimera")
Fishfaire ("fišijada")
Mushroom festival ("izložba gljiva")
Motorcycle riders meeting "Strmac" ("Motoristički susreti Strmac")
Croatian Radio Nova Gradiška (Croatian: Hrvatski Radio Nova Gradiška, HRNG) is the local radio station.
Today some furniture industry and beer industry exists in small parts. There is an initiative to extend the industry park.
Before the Croatian War of Independence, there was metallurgy industry in the city, which went bankrupt.
Đura Horvatović - Serbian Officer
Slavko Brill - sculptor and ceramics artist
Karlo Lulić - footballer
Milan Rapaić - footballer
Kim Verson - singer
