The Cobra (Turkish: Kobra) is an infantry mobility vehicle developed by Turkish firm Otokar which uses some mechanical components and sub-systems of the HMMWV
The monocoque steel v-hull provides protection against small arms fire, artillery shell shrapnel, and to a certain degree against anti-personnel/tank mines and IEDs. Front wheel arches are designed to be blown away to free blast pockets.
Cobra
The Cobra vehicle forms a common platform which can be adapted for various roles and mission requirements including: Armoured Personnel Carrier, Anti-Tank Vehicle, Reconnaissance Vehicle, Ground Surveillance Radar Vehicle, Forward Observation Vehicle, Armoured Ambulance, Armoured Command Post, turreted vehicle for 12.7mm machine gun (turret produced by the Israeli firm Rafael), 20mm cannon, anti-tank missiles such as the TOW missile/Spike missile or surface-to-air missiles.
Cobra can be used as an amphibious vehicle in combat. Turkish Naval Forces is now looking for a new amphibious vehicle and Otokar Cobra is listed amongst the candidates for acquisitions.
Cobra II
Fist unveiled at IDEF 2013, the Cobra II is a more heavily armored successor to the Cobra. The Cobra II has a combat weight that is roughly double that of its predecessor and is slightly wider, longer and taller.
Standard equipment suite includes rear view camera, thermal front camera, air conditioning system, blackout lighting system, multi-point seat belts, radio provisions, and a towing eye. It can be optionally equipped with a self-recovery winch, nuclear, biological and chemical filtration kit, automation fire extinguishing system, intercom system, navigation system and an auxiliary power unit. In an APC configuration the vehicle can carry nine personnel and the vehicle can be armed with a number of different weapons, including crew operated machine guns and remote weapon stations armed with short-range surface-to-air missiles and grenade launchers. Powered by a 6.7L, six-cylinder, water cooled, turbo charged, common rail diesel engine that produces 281 hp, it's maximum road speed is 110 km/h on roads and has a maximum cruising range of 700 km
Otokar has received orders for the Cobra II both for an undisclosed customer and from the Turkish Armed Forces.
In late 2015, the Turkish Armed Forces ordered 82 Cobra II vehicles plus related systems, maintenance and support worth $52 million. Delivery is scheduled for completion in the first half of 2017.
In June 2016, the Turkish Armed Forces ordered an undisclosed number of Cobra II vehicles plus related systems, maintenance and support worth $120.8 million. Assuming the same value to vehicle ratio as the 2015 order, this would imply an order of about 180 vehicles.
In the 2008 South Ossetia war, Cobra vehicles equipped with 12.7 mm NSV machine guns and 40 mm automatic grenade launchers  were used by the special forces of Georgian Ministry of Internal Affairs during their assault on the city in the Battle of Tskhinvali.
The Nigerian Military has deployed Cobra's during operations against the terrorist Boko Haram Insurgency in the North-East of the country since 2013.
Cobra's are used by the Turkish Armed Forces in Afghanistan.
Cobra's are actively being used by the Turkish Armed Forces within the country for anti-terrorism operations.
Cobras have shown to be highly resistant against most mine and IED attacks, with the crew surviving most incidents without any injuries. The increasing sophistication of IED use by the terrorist PKK and the loss of eight soldiers inside one on August 19, 2015 has prompted the Turkish Armed Forces to upgrade its fleet of armored vehicles. This has in part led to additional orders for the improved Cobra II
 Azerbaijan
 Algeria
 Bangladesh
 Georgia
 Kazakhstan
 Kosovo
 Maldives
 Mauritania
 Macedonia
 Nigeria
 Pakistan
 Russia
 Slovenia
 Turkey
 United Arab Emirates
 UN
 Turkey
Komatsu LAV of Japan
Véhicule Blindé Léger of France
Dozor-B of Ukraine
MOWAG Eagle
Humvee
