Hohenfels (literally High rock) is a municipality in the district of Neumarkt in the region of Upper Palatinate (German: Oberpfalz) in Bavaria, Germany. The town is host to the United States Army Garrison Hohenfels, which operates the Joint Multinational Readiness Center for training NATO armed forces.
The German Army originally founded a training area in Hohenfels in 1938. On April 24, 1945, Major General Stanley Eric Reinhart's 65th Infantry Division captured Hohenfels. Generalmajor Gustav Geiger, staff and guards surrendered. The POW camp with numerous British inmates was liberated.
In 1951, Hohenfels became a training area for the United States military and was used primarily by United States forces until 1956. In 1955, the German Bundeswehr was founded, and in 1956 the first German unit was stationed in Camp Poellnricht (i.e. Lager Pöllnricht) which had been formerly, a displaced persons camp, until their deactivation in 2001. From 1956 to 1988, the Hohenfels Training Area was used by NATO forces consisting primarily of American, German, Canadian, and occasionally British and French forces.
In 1988, Hohenfels became the home of the Combat Maneuver Training Center (CMTC), the mission of which was to provide realistic combined arms training for the United States Army, Europe, and Seventh Army's maneuver battalion task forces in force-on-force exercises.
Exercises revolve around the fictional nation of Danubia and its three provinces of friendly Sowenia, hostile Vilslakia, and neutral Jursland. The opposing force is the fictional army of Danubia. The 1st Battalion, 4th Infantry Regiment represented the "4th Guards Motorized Rifle Regiment". M113A2s are used to replicate Soviet BMP-2 IFVs and M60A3 tanks are used to replicate Soviet T-80 tanks.
In December 2005 the CMTC was transformed and officially named the Joint Multinational Readiness Center (JMRC), part of the Joint Multinational Training Center (JMTC) which oversees training of all of United States Army Europe (USAREUR).
Grafenwöhr
