Felix Martin Julius Steiner (23 May 1896 – 12 May 1966) was an Obergruppenführer in the Waffen-SS during World War II, who commanded several SS divisions and corps. He was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords. Together with Paul Hausser, he contributed significantly to the development and transformation of the Waffen-SS into a military force made up of volunteers and conscripts from both occupied and un-occupied lands.
Steiner was chosen by Heinrich Himmler to oversee the creation of and then command the elite SS Division Wiking. In 1943, he was promoted to the command of the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps. On 28 January 1945, Steiner was placed in command of the 11th SS Panzer Army, which formed part of a new ad-hoc formation to protect Berlin from the Soviet armies advancing from the Vistula River.
On 21 April, during the Battle for Berlin, Steiner was placed in command of Army Detachment Steiner, while Adolf Hitler ordered Steiner to envelop the 1st Belorussian Front through a pincer movement, advancing from the North of the city. However, as his exhausted unit was outnumbered by ten to one, Steiner made it clear that he did not have the capacity for a counter-attack on 22 April during the daily situation conference in the Führerbunker.
After the capitulation of Germany, Steiner was imprisoned and indicted as part of the Nuremberg Trials. He was cleared of war crimes charges and released in 1948. He was a founding member of HIAG, a lobby group founded by former high-ranking Waffen-SS personnel in 1951 to campaign for the legal, economic and historical rehabilitation of the Waffen-SS. Steiner died in 1966.
Born in 1896, Felix Steiner the Royal Prussian Army as a cadet in an infantry regiment. During World War I, he was awarded the Iron Cross 1st and 2nd class. In 1919, Steiner joined the Freikorps in the East Prussian city of Memel and was incorporated into the Reichswehr in 1921. In 1933, he left the Reichswehr having attained the rank of major.
Steiner joined the Nazi Party (membership number: 4.264.295) and the Sturmabteilung (SA). In 1935, he joined the SS and took command of a battalion of SS-Verfügungstruppen (SS-VT) troops, and within a year had been promoted to SS-Standartenführer being in command of the SS-Deutschland Regiment. At the outbreak of World War II, Steiner was SS-Oberführer in charge of the Waffen-SS regiment SS-Deutschland. He led this regiment well through invasion of Poland and the Battle of France, for which he was awarded the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross on 15 August 1940.
After the early war campaigns, Steiner was appointed by Reichsführer-SS Heinrich Himmler to oversee the creation of, and then command the new SS Division Wiking, which was made up of non-German volunteers, and at the time of its creation consisted mostly of Dutch, Walloons, Finns and Scandinavians including the Danish regiment Frikorps Danmark. Steiner commanded the division until his promotion to command of the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps.
In April 1943, Steiner was placed in command of the newly formed III SS Panzer Corps. The unit participated in anti-partisan actions in Yugoslavia. In November/December 1943 his corps was transferred to the Eastern Front and positioned in the northern sector at Leningrad under Army Group North. Steiner's Panzer Corps played a leading role during the defensive battles at Narva. During the battle of the Tannenberg line his forces were able to withstand a superior Soviet force with only 7 tanks left. His unit then withdrew with the rest of Army Group North to the Courland Peninsula.
In January 1945, Steiner along with the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps was transferred by ship from the Courland Pocket to help with the defence of the German homeland.
The III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps was assigned to Army Group Vistula and put under the new Eleventh SS Panzer Army, although this army really only existed on paper. Once the Soviet Army reached the Oder river, Eleventh SS Panzer Army became inactive and the III SS Panzer Corps was reassigned to the German Third Panzer Army as a reserve during the Soviets' Berlin Offensive Operation. During the Battle of Halbe, the first major battle of the offensive, General Gotthard Heinrici, the commander of Army Group Vistula, transferred most of the III SS Panzer Corps' divisions to General Theodor Busse's German Ninth Army.
Steiner had always been one of Hitler's favourite commanders, who admired his 'get the job done' attitude and the fact that he owed his allegiance to the Waffen-SS, not the Prussian Officer Corps. Joseph Goebbels also praised Steiner. "He is energetic and purposeful and is attacking his job with great verve," Goebbels wrote on 1 March 1945.
By 21 April, Soviet Marshal Zhukov's 1st Belorussian Front had broken through the German lines on the Seelow Heights. Hitler, ignoring the facts, started to call the ragtag units that came under Steiner's command Army Detachment Steiner (Armeeabteilung Steiner). An army detachment was something more than a corps but less than an army.
Hitler ordered Steiner to attack the northern flank of the huge salient created by the 1st Belorussian Front's breakout. Steiner's attack was due to coincide with General Busse's Ninth Army, attacking from the south in a pincer attack. The Ninth Army had been pushed to south of the 1st Belorussian Front's salient. To facilitate this attack, Steiner was assigned the three divisions of the Ninth Army's CI Army Corps: the 4th SS Panzergrenadier Division Polizei, the 5th Jäger Division, and the 25th Panzergrenadier Division. All three divisions were north of the Finow Canal on the Northern flank of Zhukov's salient. Weidling's LVI Panzer Corps, which was still east of Berlin with its northern flank just below Werneuchen, was also to participate in the attack.
The three divisions from CI Army Corps were to attack south from Eberswalde on the Finow Canal towards the LVI Panzer Corps. The three divisions from CI Army Corps were 24 kilometres (about 15 miles) east of Berlin and the attack to the south would cut the 1st Belorussian Front's salient in two.
Steiner called Heinrici and informed him that the plan could not be implemented because the 5th Jäger Division and the 25th Panzergrenadier Division were deployed defensively and could not be redeployed until the 2nd Naval Division arrived from the coast to relieve them. This left only two battalions of the 4th SS Panzergrenadier Division available and they had no combat weapons.
Based on Steiner's assessment, Heinrici called Hans Krebs, Chief of Staff of the German General Staff of the Army High Command (Oberkommando des Heeres or OKH), and told him that the plan could not be implemented. Heinrici asked to speak to Hitler, but was told Hitler was too busy to take his call.
On 22 April 1945, at his afternoon conference, Hitler became aware that Steiner was not going to attack and he fell into a tearful rage. Hitler declared that the war was lost, he blamed the generals, and announced that he would stay on in Berlin until the end and then kill himself.
On the same day, General Rudolf Holste was given what few mobile forces Steiner commanded so that he could participate in a new plan to relieve Berlin. Holste was to attack from the north while General Walther Wenck attacked from the west and General Theodor Busse attacked from the south. These attacks amounted to little and, on 25 April, the Soviet forces attacking to the north and to the south of Berlin linked up to the west of the city.
After the surrender, Steiner was incarcerated until 1948. He faced charges at the Nuremberg Trials, but they were dropped and he was released.
Alongside with Paul Hausser, Herbert Gille and Otto Kumm, Steiner became a founding member of HIAG, the lobby group founded by former high-ranking Waffen-SS members in West Germany in 1951. He published Die Freiwilligen der Waffen-SS: Idee und Opfergang; English: "The Volunteers of Waffen-SS: Idea and Sacrifice" in 1958. Steiner's books and memoirs have been characterised by historian Charles Sydnor as one of the "most important works of apologist literature," alongside the books Grenadiere by Kurt Meyer and Waffen-SS in Action by Paul Hausser. These works demanded rehabilitation of the military branch of the Nazi Party, with Steiner's works being important in stressing the theme of the purely military Waffen-SS. Steiner's next book was published in 1963 under the title Die Armee der Geächteten (English: "The Army of the Outlaws") and was equally tendentious. George Stein characterises this genre and Steiner's contribution to it as "SS apologetics".
Steiner died on 12 May 1966, shortly before his 70th birthday. He never married.
1 June 1936 Entrance into the SS-Verfügungstruppe as SS-Standartenführer
Started World War II as SS-Oberführer
9 November 1940 promoted SS-Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen-SS
1 January 1942 promoted SS-Gruppenführer und Generalleutnant der Waffen-SS
1 July 1943 promoted SS-Obergruppenführer und General der Waffen-SS
Iron Cross (1914)
2nd Class (9 October 1914)
1st Class (3 November 1917)
Wound Badge (1918) in Black
Clasp to the Iron Cross (1939)
2nd Class (17 September 1939)
1st Class (26 September 1939)
German Cross in Gold on 22 April 1942 as SS-Gruppenführer and Generalmajor of the Waffen-SS with the 5. SS-Panzergrenadier-Division "Wiking"
Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords
Knight's Cross on 15 August 1940 as SS-Oberführer and commander of SS-Standarte "Deutschland".
159th Oak Leaves on 23 December 1942 as SS-Gruppenführer and Generalleutnant of the Waffen-SS and commander of 5. SS-Panzergrenadier-Division "Wiking"
86th Swords on 10 August 1944 as SS-Obergruppenführer and general of the Waffen-SS and commanding general of III. germanischen SS-Panzerkorps
Order of the Cross of Liberty, 1st class with Breast Star, Oak Leaves and Swords (Finland) [10]
Mention in the Wehrmachtbericht (1 August 1944)
Commander of the SS-Regiment "Deutschland" 1 June 1936 to 1 December 1940
1 December 1940 to 1 January 1943 Commander of SS-Germania Division (mot),
On 31 December 1940 SS-Germania Division renamed SS-Wiking Division
On 9 November 1942 SS-Wiking redesignated 5.SS-Wiking Panzergrenadier Division (I),
10 May 1943 to November 9, 1944 Commander of the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps
26 November 1944 to March 5, 1945 Commander of the XI SS Panzer Army
Command of the III (Germanic) SS Panzer Corps a corps in the Third Panzer Army
On 21 April 1945 what remained of Steiner's command redesignated Army Detachment Steiner
Operation Solstice
Waffen-SS in popular culture
