Bandar-e Emam Khomeyni (Persian: بندرامام خمینی‎‎, also Romanized as Bandare Emm Xomeyni; formerly, Bandar Šâhpur) is a city in and the capital of Bandar-e Emam Khomeyni District of Mahshahr County, Khuzestan Province, Iran. At the 2006 census, its population was 67,078, in 14,681 families.
Bandar Imam Khomeini is a port city on the Persian Gulf in Khūzestān Province, Iran. Before the 1979 Iranian Revolution, it was known as Bandar Shahpur. It is named after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
The city is home to Petrochimi Bandar Imam basketball club, which plays in the Iranian Super League.
The port is located at the terminus of the Trans-Iranian Railway linking the Persian Gulf with Tehran and on to the Caspian Sea.
During World War II it consisted only of a jetty, two shipping berths, a railhead and warehouses and a civilian settlement some miles distant. The port was initially in German and Italian hands, but was stormed on August 25, 1941 by a combined British and Indian force supported by the Royal Navy. A flotiila led by the armed merchant cruiser HMS Kanimbla had sailed up the waterways and in the raid captured eight Axis vessels, two gunboats and the floating dock. It was at time that, among others, the German ship Hohenfels fell into British hands and became Empire Kamal.
Thereafter it was administered by the US Army 482nd Port Battalion and served as a critical supply point for Allied military aid for Russia. The port facilities were also used for merchant and military vessel layup and repair. Three additional berths were built during the war.
The Bandar Imam port is a transshipment point for containers, bulk and general cargo, with exclusive access to the facilities held by Iran Shipping Lines (IRISL). In 2005 the Iranian Government proposed direct container shipments between the port and western Europe, but negotiations with shipping lines for dedicated port facilities and access have not concluded.
The Port has seven terminals with 40 berths of about 6,500 metres frontage.
The terminals are supported by warehouses with a capacity of 171,000 m² and open storage areas covering 10.9 km².
 Persian Gulf Freeway
 Road 96
