Obrenovac (Serbian Cyrillic: Обреновац, pronounced [obrěːnoʋat͡s]) is a town and municipality in northern Serbia. In 2011 the town had a population of 24,568, and the municipality of 71,419. Obrenovac is one of 17 municipalities that make up the greater Belgrade area. Largest Serbian thermal power plant TPP Nikola Tesla is located on the outskirts of the town.
Obrenovac was submerged and completely evacuated during the 2014 Southeast Europe floods, with 14 confirmed deaths as result.
Obrenovac is situated 30 km south-west of central Belgrade near bends of the river Sava to the north. The river Kolubara flows to the east of the town on its way to join the Sava.
Total land area of the municipality of Obrenovac is 411 km2 (159 sq mi). Apart from the town, it consists of the following villages:
Some of the neighborhoods in the town are Topolice, Rojkovac, Dudovi, Rvati, Muzička kolonija,Sljivice, Belo polje, Gaj and Stočnjak.
In the Middle Ages, the area was part of Serbian states. King of Srem Dragutin Nemanjić ruled it between 1282 and 1319, and established monasteries in Grabovac and Mislođin. In 1521, it was conquered by the Ottoman Empire, who ruled it for the next 300 years. Subsequently, it was site of numerous battles in frequent Ottoman–Habsburg wars and often changed hands. Austrian Regent of Serbia Charles Alexander, Duke of Württemberg built a summer house in nearby village of Stubline (then Neudorf). During a period of Austrian rule, between 1688. and 1717, the town was called Zweibrücken ('two bridges'), and during the Turkish rule it was called Palež ('arson'), possibly as a reference to frequent looting and fires it was subjected to.
On 11 April 1815, during the Second Serbian Uprising, the town was burned to the ground by Serbian forces in a battle against Ottomans. It was restored in 1859 by prince of Serbia Miloš Obrenović, after whom it was named. The Municipality of Obrenovac was incorporated within community of Belgrade municipalities in 1957.
The Day of the Municipality is December 20, the date of the decree of Prince Miloš Obrenović by which the name of Obrenovac was instituted, and its patron day is the Holy Trinity.
Obrenovac was Serbian town which suffered the greatest damage by the unprecedented floods in May 2014. Most of the population has been evacuated to safety. Sudden surge of water from Kolubara river on May 15 devastated the town, killing at least 14 persons, with several persons still missing.
Largest Serbian thermal power plant TPP Nikola Tesla is located on the outskirts of the town; its chimney is widely visible as the surrounding area is generally flat.
There is a green market in the centre of the town, and also flea market (as of August 2006) to the south of the town on the Valjevo road. The most famous football club from Obrenovac is FK Radnički Obrenovac; its stadium is beside the Belgrade road. The oldest school in the town is found next to Topolice. It carries the name of Jovan Popović. The school was built by Miloš Obrenović.
Obrenovac High School
Three bus lines connect Obrenovac with Belgrade: 860, 860E and 861A.
Obrenovac is twinned with following cities and municipalities:
 Kumanovo, Republic of Macedonia
 Staré Mesto, Slovakia
 Bergen, Norway
List of cities in Serbia
Obrenović Dynasty (Serbian Kings)
Subdivisions of Belgrade
List of Belgrade neighborhoods and suburbs
