Dieffenbachia /ˌdiːfᵻnˈbækiə/ is a genus of tropical flowering plants in the family Araceae. It is native to the New World Tropics from Mexico and the West Indies south to Argentina. It is widely cultivated as an ornamental, especially as a house plant, and has become naturalized on a few tropical islands.
Dieffenbachia is a perennial herbaceous plant with straight stem, simple and alternate leaves containing white spots and flecks, making it attractive as indoor foliage. Species in this genus are popular as houseplants because of their tolerance of shade. The common name, "dumb canes" refers to the poisoning effect of raphides, which can cause temporary inability to speak; fo Dieffenbachia was named by Heinrich Wilhelm Schott, director of the Botanical Gardens in Vienna to honor his head gardener Joseph Dieffenbach (1796–1863).
With a minimum temperature of 5 °C (41 °F), dieffenbachia must be grown indoors in temperate areas. They need light, but filtered sunlight through a window is usually sufficient. They also need moderately moist soil, which should be regularly fertilized with a proprietary houseplant fertilizer. Leaves will periodically roll up and fall off to make way for new leaves. Yellowing of the leaves is generally a sign of problematic conditions, such as a nutrient deficiency in the soil. Dieffenbachia respond well to hot temperatures and dry climates.
The Dieffenbachia prefers medium sunlight, moderately dry soil and average home temperatures of 62–80 °F (17–27 °C) Water about twice a week.
Species
Dieffenbachia aglaonematifolia Engl. - Brazil, Paraguay; Corrientes + Misiones Provinces of Argentina
Dieffenbachia antioquensis Linden ex Rafarin - Colombia
Dieffenbachia aurantiaca Engl - Costa Rica, Panama
Dieffenbachia beachiana Croat & Grayum - Costa Rica, Panama
Dieffenbachia bowmannii Carrière - Colombia, northwestern Brazil
Dieffenbachia brittonii Engl. - Colombia
Dieffenbachia burgeri Croat & Grayum - Costa Rica
Dieffenbachia cannifolia Engl. - Colombia, Ecuador, Peru
Dieffenbachia concinna Croat & Grayum - Costa Rica, Nicaragua
Dieffenbachia copensis Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia cordata Engl. - Peru
Dieffenbachia costata Klotzsch ex Schott - Colombia, Ecuador, Peru
Dieffenbachia crebripistillata Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia daguensis Engl. - Colombia, Ecuador
Dieffenbachia davidsei Croat & Grayum - Costa Rica
Dieffenbachia duidae (Steyerm.) G.S.Bunting - Venezuela, Guyana
Dieffenbachia elegans A.M.E.Jonker & Jonker - Bolivia, northwestern Brazil, the Guianas
Dieffenbachia enderi Engl. - Colombia
Dieffenbachia fortunensis Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia fosteri Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia fournieri N.E.Br. - Colombia
Dieffenbachia galdamesiae Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia gracilis Huber - Peru, northwestern Brazil
Dieffenbachia grayumiana Croat - Costa Rica, Panama, Colombia
Dieffenbachia hammelii Croat & Grayum - Costa Rica, Nicaragua
Dieffenbachia herthae Diels - Ecuador
Dieffenbachia horichii Croat & Grayum - Costa Rica
Dieffenbachia humilis Poepp. - Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, northwestern Brazil, the Guianas
Dieffenbachia imperialis Linden & André - Peru
Dieffenbachia isthmia Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia killipii Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia lancifolia Linden & André - Colombia
Dieffenbachia leopoldii W.Bull - Colombia
Dieffenbachia longispatha Engl. & K.Krause - Honduras, Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama, Colombia, Venezuela
Dieffenbachia lutheri Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia macrophylla Poepp. - Peru
Dieffenbachia meleagris L.Linden & Rodigas - Ecuador
Dieffenbachia nitidipetiolata Croat & Grayum - Panama
Dieffenbachia obliqua Poepp. - Peru
Dieffenbachia obscurinervia Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia oerstedii Schott - southern Mexico (Veracruz, Tabasco, Campeche, Oaxaca, Chiapas), Central America (all 7 countries), Colombia
Dieffenbachia olbia L.Linden & Rodigas - Peru
Dieffenbachia paludicola N.E.Br. ex Gleason - northwestern Brazil, the Guianas, Venezuela
Dieffenbachia panamensis Croat - Panama
Dieffenbachia parlatorei Linden & André - Colombia, Venezuela
Dieffenbachia parvifolia Engl. - northwestern Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador, Peru, Venezuela
Dieffenbachia pittieri Engl. & K.Krause - Panama
Dieffenbachia seguine (Jacq.) Schott - West Indies, south to Brazil and Bolivia
Dieffenbachia shuttleworthiana Regel - Colombia
Dieffenbachia standleyi Croat - Honduras
Dieffenbachia tonduzii Croat & Grayum - Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Panama, Colombia, Ecuador
Dieffenbachia weberbaueri Engl. - Peru
Dieffenbachia weirii Berk. - Colombia
Dieffenbachia wendlandii Schott - southern Mexico (Querétaro, Veracruz, Oaxaca, Chiapas) south to Panama
Dieffenbachia williamsii Croat - Bolivia
Dieffenbachia wurdackii Croat - Peru
In a survey which began in 1998, researchers in Costa Rica noticed that the strawberry poison frog Oophaga pumilio, deposited almost all (89%) of their tadpoles on the leaf axils of Dieffenbachia. As a result, the frog population fluctuated with the abundance of Dieffenbachia, especially in secondary forest. A majority of the plants were eradicated by 2012 when the surveyors returned to the same area, with only 28% of 2002 plant numbers remaining. Researchers concluded that the reason for the rapid decline in Dieffenbachia was due to increased abundance of the collared peccary Pecari tajacu in the La Selva Biological Station research area; a small pig-like animal which feeds on Dieffenbachia and other plants.”
In Brazil the plant is said to ward against "negative energies" and "evil eye", etc. Because of this, it is commonly placed on a "seven lucky herbs" vase, along with common rue, Capsicum annuum, snake plant, basil, rosemary and Petiveria alliacea.
The cells of the Dieffenbachia plant contain needle-shaped calcium oxalate crystals called raphides. If a leaf is chewed, these crystals can cause a temporary burning sensation and erythema. In rare cases, edema of tissues exposed to the plant has been reported. Mastication and ingestion generally result in only mild symptoms. With both children and pets, contact with dieffenbachia (typically from chewing) can cause a host of unpleasant symptoms, including intense numbing, oral irritation, excessive drooling, and localized swelling. However, these effects are rarely life-threatening. In most cases, symptoms are mild, and can be successfully treated with analgesic agents, antihistamines, or medical charcoal. Gastric evacuation or lavage is "seldom" indicated. In patients with exposure to toxic plants, 70% are children younger than 5 years.
In the Emergency! episode "Messin' Around" (Season 3; Episode 16), a woman (Joan Shawlee) put the Dieffenbachia crystals in her husband's blood pressure medicine to shut him up, resulting in jokes about it being called the mother-in-law plant.
