Coreopsis /ˌkɒriːˈɒpsᵻs/ is a genus of flowering plants in the family Asteraceae. Common names include calliopsis and tickseed, a name shared with various other plants.
They range from 46–120 cm (18–47 in) in height. The flat fruits are small and dry and look like bugs. Many of its species are cultivated. The 75 to 80 Coreopsis species are native to North, Central, and South America. The flowers are usually yellow with a toothed tip. They have showy flower heads with involucral bracts in two distinct series of eight each, the outer being commonly connate at the base. The name Coreopsis is derived from the Greek words κόρις (koris), meaning "bedbug," and ὄψις (opsis), meaning "view," referring to the shape of the achene.
Coreopsis species are used as food plants by the caterpillars of some Lepidoptera species including Coleophora acamtopappi. The sunny, summer blooming, yellow daisy-like flowers are popular in gardens to attract butterflies.
All Coreopsis species were designated the state wildflower of Florida in the United States in 1991.
Coreopsis is a variable genus closely related to Bidens. In fact, neither Coreopsis nor Bidens, as defined in the 20th century, is strictly monophyletic. Coreopsis is best described as paraphyletic. Previously (1936) Coreopsis was classified into 11 sections and 114 species, but the African species were subsequently reclassified as Bidens, leaving the North and South American species under Coreopsis, some 75-80 in all. 45 are in the 11 North American sections, and the remaining 35 are in the South American Section Pseudoagarista. The North American species fall into two broad groups, with 5 sections in Mexico and North America (12 species) and the remaining 5 sections in Eastern North America (26 species). 
One group which does seem to be monophyletic consists of temperate species from North America, including five sections of Coreopsis, Bidens coronata and Bidens tripartita, and the genus Thelesperma (five species). 
One classification (GRIN) of the genus consists of eleven sections, shown by cladistic relationships with number of species in parenthesis. 
Mexico and Western North America
Coreopsis sect. Electra (3)
Coreopsis sect. Anathysana (1)
Coreopsis sect. Tuckermannia (2)
Coreopsis sect. Pugiopappus (3)
Coreopsis sect. Leptosyne (3)
Eastern North America
Coreopsis sect. Silphidium (1)
Coreopsis sect. Gyrophyllum (syn. Palmatae) (6)
Coreopsis sect. Calliopsis (3)
Coreopsis sect. Eublepharis (7)
Coreopsis sect. Coreopsis (9)
South America
Coreopsis sect. Pseudoagarista (35)
See: 
Coreopsis cyclocarpa S.F.Blake
Coreopsis bicolor
Coreopsis leavenworthii Torr. & A.Gray – Leavenworth's Tickseed
Coreopsis paludosa M.E.Jones
Coreopsis tinctoria Nutt. – Plains Coreopsis
Coreopsis auriculata L. – Lobed Tickseed
Coreopsis basalis (A.Dietr.) S.F.Blake – Goldenmane Tickseed
Coreopsis grandiflora Hogg ex Sweet – Large-flowered Tickseed
Coreopsis intermedia Sherff – Goldenwave Tickseed
Coreopsis lanceolata L. – Lance Coreopsis, Lance-leaf Tickseed
Coreopsis nuecensis A.Heller – Crown Tickseed
Coreopsis nuecensoides E.B.Sm. – Rio Grande Tickseed
Coreopsis pubescens Elliott – Star Tickseed
Coreopsis wrightii (A.Gray) H.M.Parker – Rock Tickseed
Coreopsis cuneifolia Greenm.
Coreopsis mexicana
Coreopsis mutica DC.
Coreopsis floridana E.B.Sm. – Florida Tickseed
Coreopsis gladiata Walter – Coastalplain Tickseed
Coreopsis integrifolia Poir. – Fringeleaf Tickseed
Coreopsis linifolia Nutt. – Texas Tickseed
Coreopsis nudata Nutt. – Georgia Tickseed
Coreopsis rosea Nutt. – Pink Tickseed
Coreopsis delphiniifolia Lam. – Larkspurleaf Tickseed
Coreopsis major Walter – Greater Tickseed
Coreopsis palmata Nutt. – Stiff Tickseed
Coreopsis pulchra F.E.Boynton – Woodland Tickseed
Coreopsis tripteris L. – Tall Tickseed
Coreopsis verticillata L. – Whorled Tickseed
Coreopsis douglasii (DC.) H.M.Hall – Douglas's Tickseed
Coreopsis californica (Nutt.) H.Sharsm. – California Tickseed
Coreopsis stillmanii (A.Gray) S.F.Blake – Stillman's Tickseed
South America, 35 species
Coreopsis mcvaughii D.J.Crawford
Coreopsis petrophila A.Gray
Coreopsis petrophiloides B.L.Rob. & Greenm.
Coreopsis rudis (Benth.) Hemsl.
Coreopsis bigelovii (A.Gray) Voss – Bigelow's Tickseed
Coreopsis calliopsidea (DC.) A.Gray – Leafstem Tickseed
Coreopsis hamiltonii (Elmer) H. Sharsm. – Mount Hamilton Tickseed
Coreopsis latifolia Michx. – Broadleaf Tickseed
Coreopsis gigantea (Kellogg) H.M.Hall – Giant Coreopsis
Coreopsis maritima (Nutt.) Hook.f. – Sea Dahlia
Flora of North America: Coreopsis
