Lysimachia /ˌlaɪsᵻˈmeɪkiə/ is a genus consisting of 193 accepted species of flowering plants traditionally classified in the family Primulaceae. Based on a molecular phylogenetic study it was transferred to the family Myrsinaceae, before this family was later merged into the Primulaceae.
Lysimachia species often have yellow flowers, and grow vigorously. They tend to grow in damp conditions. Several species within Lysimachia are commonly called loosestrife, although this name is also used for plants within the genus Lythrum. The genus is named in honor of Lysimachus, a king of ancient Sicily, who is said to have calmed a mad ox by feeding it a member of the genus.
Lysimachia species are used as food plants by the larvae of some butterflies and moths, including the Dot Moth, Grey Pug, Lime-speck Pug, Small Angle Shades and V-pug.
Bees of the genus Macropis are specialized to pollinate oil-producing Lysimachia plants. These bees use exclusively Lysimachia floral oils for building theirs nests and provisioning cells. A 2007 study found Lysimachia floral-specific chemicals were strong attractors for Macropis nuda and Macropis fulvipes bees that are seldom found in other plant genera.
Lysimachia asperulifolia, orth. var. L. asperulaefolia - roughleaf yellow loosestrife (endemic to Atlantic coastal plain in N-S Carolina)
Lysimachia atropurpurea - Purple gooseneck loosestrife
Lysimachia ciliata L. - Fringed loosestrife (North America)
Lysimachia clethroides - Gooseneck loosestrife
Lysimachia congestiflora
Lysimachia daphnoides (A.Gray) Hillebr. Lehua makanoe (Island of Kauaʻi in Hawaiʻi)
Lysimachia fraseri Duby - Fraser's yellow loosestrife (Southeastern United States)
Lysimachia filifolia C.N.Forbes (Islands of Oʻahu and Kauaʻi in Hawaiʻi)
Lysimachia glutinosa
Lysimachia hillebrandii Hook.f. ex A.Gray - Kolokolo kuahiwi (Hawaiʻi)
Lysimachia hybrida Michx.
Lysimachia iniki - Wailua River yellow loosestrife (endemic to Kauai, Hawaii)
Lysimachia japonica
Lysimachia lichiangensis Forrest
Lysimachia lydgatei - Maui yellow loosestrife. (endemic to Maui, Hawaii)
Lysimachia maritima
Lysimachia maxima (R.Knuth) H.St.John (Island of Molokaʻi in Hawaiʻi)
Lysimachia minoricensis J.J.Rodr. (Spain)
Lysimachia nemorum L. - Yellow pimpernel
Lysimachia nummularia L. - Creeping Jenny, Moneywort (Europe)
Lysimachia pendens
Lysimachia punctata - spotted loosestrife
Lysimachia quadriflora Sims - Fourflower yellow loosestrife (Eastern North America)
Lysimachia quadrifolia L. - Whorled loosestrife (Eastern North America)
Lysimachia scopulensis
Lysimachia sertulata - Chilean melilukul
Lysimachia terrestris (L.) Britton, Sterns & Poggenb. - Swamp candles (North America)
Lysimachia thyrsiflora - tufted loosestrife
Lysimachia venosa - Veined yellow loosestrife (endemic to Kauai, Hawaii)
Lysimachia verticillaris
Lysimachia vulgaris L. - Garden loosestrife, Yellow loosestrife (Eurasia)
