Styphnolobium is a small genus of three or four species of small trees and shrubs in the subfamily Faboideae of the pea family Fabaceae, formerly included within a broader interpretation of the genus Sophora. It was recently assigned to the unranked, monophyletic Cladrastis clade. The species of Styphnolobium differ from Sophora in lacking the ability to form symbioses with rhizobia (nitrogen fixing bacteria) on their roots. They also differ from the genus Calia (mescalbeans) in having deciduous leaves and flowers in axillary, not terminal, racemes. The leaves are pinnate, with 9–21 leaflets, and the flowers in pendulous racemes similar to those of the black locust. Necklacepod is a common name for plants in this genus.
Styphnolobium comprises the following species:
Styphnolobium affine (Torr. & A. Gray) Walp., the Coralbean or Eve's Necklace is native to the southern United States in Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas and Louisiana. It is a large shrub or small tree, growing to 5–7 m tall, with white or pale violet flowers.
Styphnolobium burseroides M. Sousa & Rudd
Styphnolobium caudatum M. Sousa & Rudd is native to Nicaragua.
Styphnolobium conzattii (Standl.) M. Sousa & Rudd
Styphnolobium monteviridis M. Sousa & Rudd is native to Central America.
Styphnolobium parviflorum M. Sousa & Rudd
Styphnolobium protantherum M. Sousa & Rudd
Styphnolobium sporadicum M. Sousa & Rudd
Styphnolobium japonicum (L.) Schott, the Pagoda Tree (Chinese Scholar, Japanese pagodatree; syn. Sophora japonica), is native to eastern Asia (mainly China; despite the name, it is introduced in Japan), is a popular ornamental tree in Europe, North America and South Africa, grown for its white flowers, borne in late summer after most other flowering trees have long finished flowering. It grows into a lofty tree 10–20 m tall with an equal spread, and produces a fine, dark brown timber.
The Pagoda Tree is widely used in bonsai gardening. The Guilty Chinese Scholartree was a historic Pagoda Tree in Beijing, on which the last emperor of the Ming Dynasty, Chongzhen, hanged himself.
S. japonicum (Chinese: 槐; pinyin: huái; formerly Sophora japonica) is one of the 50 fundamental herbs used in traditional Chinese medicine.
Styphnolobium japonicum (as Sophora japonica)
"Chinese Scholar Tree"
The Evil God in the Pagoda Tree Japanese folktale with the Pagoda Tree at hyakumonogatari.com