Solidago virgaurea (European goldenrod or woundwort) is an herbaceous perennial plant of the family Asteraceae. It is widespread across most of Europe as well as North Africa and northern, central, and southwestern Asia (China, Russia, India, Turkey, Kazakhstan, etc.). It is grown as a garden flower with many different cultivars. It flowers profusely in late summer.
Solidago virgaurea is a perennial herb up to 100 cm (40 inches) tall, with a branching underground caudex and a woody rhizome. It produces arrays of numerous small yellow flower heads at the top of the stem.
Subspecies and varieties
Solidago virgaurea subsp. alpestris (Waldst. & Kit.) Gremli
Solidago virgaurea subsp. armena (Grossh.) Greuter
Solidago virgaurea subsp. asiatica Kitam. ex Hara
Solidago virgaurea var. calcicola Fernald
Solidago virgaurea subsp. caucasica (Kem.-Nath.) Greuter
Solidago virgaurea subsp. dahurica (Kitag.) Kitag.
Solidago virgaurea subsp. gigantea (Nakai) Kitam.
Solidago virgaurea var. insularis (Kitam.) Hara
Solidago virgaurea subsp. jailarum (Juz.) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. lapponica (With.) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. macrorrhiza (Lange) Nyman
Solidago virgaurea subsp. minuta (L.) Arcang.
Solidago virgaurea subsp. stenophylla (G.E.Schultz) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. talyschensis (Tzvelev) Sennikov
Solidago virgaurea subsp. taurica (Juz.) Tzvelev
Solidago virgaurea subsp. turfosa (Woronow ex Grossh.) Greuter
Solidago virgaurea subsp. virgaurea
Solidago virgaurea var. virgaurea
This plant was cultivated in the Arab world, who used it in their medical system. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries it was used in Europe to heal wounds. It has astringent, diuretic, antiseptic and other properties.
Modern herbalists also use it to treat catarrh and kidney stones. It is blended with other tonic herbs to cleanse or "flush" the kidneys and bladder, either as part of a healing fast, or to treat cystitis. In the case of a fast, it is made into a combined tincture as noted, taken with a supporting blend of herbal teas, and grape or watermelon juice is drunk through the day, alternating with Potassium broth.[2]
