The Seventh One is Toto's seventh studio album. It was released in 1988, and became the best-received Toto album since Toto IV. The Seventh One is the second and last album until the Toto XIV (2015) to feature Joseph Williams on lead vocals. He was fired after the Seventh One world tour due to loss of voice attributed to drug abuse. The single "Pamela" reached number 22 in the Billboard charts. The title track, "The Seventh One," is only featured on the Japanese version of the album and on the B-side of the "Pamela" single. It was also released on some compilations on a later date.
Though critically well-received, The Seventh One was the first Toto album since Turn Back to have fewer than two charting hits in the US. According to Allmusic, it was a combination of this fact and the "anonymous" sound of the album's songs which led to The Seventh One becoming the lowest charting Toto album on the Billboard Charts up to that point. However, the album entered the Top 10 in numerous European countries, earning Gold and Platinum certifications.
"Pamela" (David Paich, Joseph Williams) - 5:11
"You Got Me" (Paich, J. Williams) - 3:11
"Anna" (Steve Lukather, Randy Goodrum) - 4:58
"Stop Loving You" (Lukather, Paich) - 4:29
"Mushanga" (Paich, Jeff Porcaro) - 5:35
"Stay Away" (Paich, Lukather) - 5:31
"Straight for the Heart" (Paich, J. Williams) - 4:09
"Only the Children" (Paich, Lukather, J. Williams) - 4:11
"A Thousand Years" (J. Williams, Mark T. Williams, Paich) - 4:53
"These Chains" (Lukather, Goodrum) - 4:59
"Home of the Brave" (Paich, Lukather, Jimmy Webb, J. Williams) - 6:51
"The Seventh One" (Paich, J. Williams) - 6:201
1 Only available on Japanese copies of the album.
Produced and recorded by Toto, George Massenburg and Bill Payne
Additional engineering by Sharon Rice, John Jessel and Steve Porcaro
Assistant engineers: Paul Dieter, Ken Fowler, Duane Seykora, Mark McKenna, Greg Dennen, Scott Symington
"Stay Away" mixed by Niko Bolas
Mastered by Doug Sax and Mike Reese
Joseph Williams - lead vocals (except on "Anna" and "These Chains")
Steve Lukather - guitars, backing vocals, lead vocals on "Anna" and "These Chains"
David Paich - keyboards, backing vocals, co-lead vocals on "Home of the Brave"
Mike Porcaro - bass
Jeff Porcaro - drums, percussion
and as guest musician:
Steve Porcaro - keyboards, electronics
"Pamela"
Saxophone: Tom Scott
Vibes: Joe Porcaro
Horns arranged by Tom Scott
"You Got Me"
Additional backing vocals: Patti Austin
Additional percussion: Lenny Castro, Jim Keltner
Horns arranged by Jerry Hey & David Paich
"Anna"
Additional percussion: Michael Fisher, Joe Porcaro
Strings arranged by Marty Paich, David Paich & James Newton Howard; conducted by Marty Paich
"Stop Loving You"
Additional backing vocals: Jon Anderson
Additional percussion: Michael Fisher
Additional keyboards: Bill Payne
Horns arranged by Tom Scott
"Mushanga"
Additional backing vocals: Patti Austin
Additional percussion: Joe Porcaro
Steel drums: Andy Narell
Recorders & flute: Jim Horn
"Stay Away"
Additional backing vocals: Linda Ronstadt
Lap steel guitar: David Lindley
"Straight For The Heart"
Additional backing vocals: Patti Austin
Saxophone: Jim Horn
"Only The Children"
Additional backing vocals: Tom Kelly
"A Thousand Years"
Arranged by Mark T. Williams & Toto
Strings arranged & conducted by David Paich
"These Chains"
Vibes: Joe Porcaro
Horns arranged by Tom Scott
Strings arranged & conducted by David Paich
"Home Of The Brave"
Strings arranged by David Paich, Conducted by Marty Paich
Stop Loving You / The Seventh One
Stop Loving You / The Seventh One / I'll Be over You (12" / CD)
Pamela / The Seventh One (released in US)
Pamela / You Got Me (international release)
Pamela / You Got Me / Stay Away (European 12" / CD)
Pamela / Stay Away (released in UK)
Pamela / Stay Away / Africa / Rosanna (12" / CD UK release)
Anna / The Seventh One (released in US)
Straight For The Heart / The Seventh One (released in US)
Mushanga / Straight for the Heart (released in the Netherlands)
