Foxboro Hot Tubs is a garage rock side project of Green Day, formed in 2007. The band includes all members of Green Day, and features Kevin Preston of Prima Donna Their first album Stop Drop and Roll!!! was released on April 22, 2008. The name "Foxboro Hot Tubs" is the alias Green Day uses to book secret shows. Billie Joe Armstrong and Jason White go by the names Reverend Strychnine Twitch and Frosco Lee respectively.
The band was brought to the attention of Green Day fans through messages sent to a select few members of the Idiot Club (Green Day's fan club) in December 2007, with three songs on their website. They formed with the idea that they "love to play music and be spontaneous, and after a few late night jams and a few too many bottles of wine, we were inspired to record some rockin' eight-track recordings". While the band's history is, as yet, unknown, they comprise the official and backing members of Green Day (with the exception of Preston), who are performing "garage" music under a nom de plume.
As speculation started to peak, Green Day confirmed that they were the Foxboro Hot Tubs, with Billie Joe Armstrong stating, "The only similarity between Foxboro Hot Tubs and Green Day is that we are the same band". He also went on to explain where the name "Foxboro Hot Tubs" came from, "The Foxboro Hot Tubs were a place we used to sneak booze and chicks into late at night. But most of the time it was just 'dude soup'." Foxboro is a housing development located in Hercules, California.
On December 8, 2007, Green Day site released six tracks, in streaming and downloadable mp3 formats, free of charge to the listener. Five days later, on December 13, the MP3s were taken off the site, which then displayed just a clock. The MP3s were reinstated on December 16, but were again removed and replaced with the clock; later the website was changed to simply redirect to the band's MySpace. All the tracks (apart from Highway 1) were included on the band's debut album Stop Drop and Roll!!!, with the samples at the beginning removed. Soon after, the song "Mother Mary" became a hit on alternative rock radio, hitting No. 16 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart. "The Pedestrian" was released as the second single off the album.
The band made their television debut on Last Call with Carson Daly, with a week dedicated to Green Day, with them performing at the end of every show on the week beginning June 15, 2009, and Green Day played on June 19, 2009. During this performance they played "Stop Drop and Roll" and "Mother Mary", bridging the two songs together.
On April 23, 2010, the band played their first new song since 2008 at a show in New York City called "Fuck Time". On October 31, 2009 during the 21st Century Breakdown World Tour as Green Day, the band performed a brief set as Foxboro Hot Tubs before the support band as a Halloween surprise at the Manchester MEN Arena.
On June 14, 2012, Green Day released a trailer for their upcoming album ¡Uno!. An erase board with new song titles featured the Foxboro Hot Tubs song "Fuck Time" which had only been played live so far, indicating that it would be released on Green Day's upcoming album trilogy; the song would later be used for the trailer of the album ¡Dos!. On August 22, 2012, in an interview on BBC Radio One, Armstrong, confirmed that the song would appear on ¡Dos! and stated that it could be a possible single. In various interviews promoting Green Day's upcoming trilogy of albums called ¡Uno!, ¡Dos!, and ¡Tré!, they have stated that the album ¡Dos! would have "a Foxboro Hot Tubs-garage kind of feel", even going so far to call it "the second Foxboro Hot Tubs album".
On October 26, 2013, The Foxboro Hot Tubs played a secret show at Eli's Mile High Club in Oakland, California. Along with performing a majority of their album, they performed several songs from Green Day's album ¡Dos!. On March 14, 2014, the band performed for the SXSW festival in Austin, Texas at Brazos Hall.
Current Members
Reverend Strychnine Twitch - lead vocals (2007–present)
Mike Dirnt - bass guitar, backing vocals (2007–present)
Tré Cool - drums, percussion, backing vocals (2007–present)
Frosco Lee - lead guitar, backing vocals (2007–present)
Jason Freese - keyboard, saxophone, flute, backing vocals (2007–present)
Kevin Preston - rhythm guitar, backing vocals (2009–present)
Studio album
Stop Drop and Roll!!! (2008; No. 21 US, No. 37 UK)
Singles
"Mother Mary" (2008; No. 16 US Modern Rock, No. 137 UK)
"The Pedestrian" (2008)
"Stop, Drop and Roll" (2008)
