Dig Your Own Hole is the second studio album by British electronica duo The Chemical Brothers, released on 7 April 1997. It features Noel Gallagher of Oasis and Beth Orton as guest vocalists.
It was the band's first UK number one album, achieving this peak in the charts on 19 April 1997. The album also had two number one singles, which were released prior to the album. The success of the album led The Chemical Brothers to be much sought-after remixers, and the duo released a mix album in 1998 entitled Brothers Gonna Work It Out. The album stands as the duo's longest studio album, exactly fourteen minutes longer than the band's debut album Exit Planet Dust; however, Born in the Echoes is available in an extended version which is over 70 minutes.
After The Chemical Brothers' successful debut album, Exit Planet Dust, released in June 1995, the duo continued to tour but quickly sought to record new material. Following the release of "Life Is Sweet", the final single from that album, the duo had changed labels from Junior Boy's Own to Virgin Records, with Virgin getting credit on their album Exit Planet Dust as well under the liner notes. The duo released an EP, Loops of Fury in January 1996, consisting of new material and a remix of one of the band's earliest and signature tracks, "Chemical Beats".
The duo met up with Noel Gallagher. They were interested in collaborating for a track. The Chemical Brothers had reportedly given him an instrumental track and he then wrote lyrics for the track. The song was released as the single "Setting Sun" in October 1996. The song entered the UK Singles Chart at number one. Stereogum said that "the combination of rave sirens and psych-rock far-outness [on Exit Planet Dust] was probably what convinced people like Noel Gallagher and Mercury Rev to jump onboard".
The booklet for the album contains various pictures. The single covers of "Setting Sun", "Block Rockin' Beats", and "Elektrobank" are all featured, in addition to a picture of an orange, a photo showing the scene used for the cover of Exit Planet Dust except from behind, and various other images. This album was also the last album to use the original Freestyle Dust logo.
The songs "It Doesn't Matter" and "Don't Stop the Rock" were released in June 1996 on vinyl as "Electronic Battle Weapon 1" and "Electronic Battle Weapon 2" respectively as promos for DJs to test in clubs. "Setting Sun" was released on 30 September 1996 as the first official single from the album and reached number one in the UK Singles Chart. "Where Do I Begin" was released as a promotional single in early 1997. "Block Rockin' Beats" was released on 24 March 1997 and reached number one in the UK Singles Chart, becoming the duo's second number one single there.
Dig Your Own Hole was released on 7 April 1997 by record labels Virgin and Freestyle Dust. It was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) on 21 January 2000.
"Elektrobank" was released on 8 September 1997 and reached number 17 in the UK Singles Chart. "The Private Psychedelic Reel" was released on 1 December 1997. A numbered release, it was ineligible for the UK Singles Charts. Further physically released promotion for the album include a DJ mix+interview set.
In 2004, the album was packaged with 1995's Exit Planet Dust in a limited edition box set as part of EMI's "2CD Originals" collection.
100 Best Albums of the Nineties.
Spin's Greatest Albums of the 90s.
In 1998, Q magazine readers voted Dig Your Own Hole the 49th greatest album of all time, and was also included in Q TV's "Top 100 Albums of All Time" list in 2008. In 2000, the same magazine placed it at number 42 in its list of the 100 Greatest British Albums Ever. NME ranked it at number 414 in its 2014 list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.
All songs written and composed by The Chemical Brothers, except where noted. 
