With Oden on Our Side is the sixth full-length studio album by the Swedish death metal band Amon Amarth, and their first album to enter the Billboard charts, the Top Heatseekers and the Independent Albums chart, peaking at number 15 and number 26 respectively.
It was recorded in May and June 2006 and was released in Europe on 22 September 2006 by Metal Blade Records. A limited edition digipak was also released with a second disc that includes live songs, demos, and unreleased recordings. With Oden on Our Side was also released on a limited red LP. The songs "Runes to My Memory" and "Cry of the Black Birds" were both made into music videos.
With Oden on Our Side takes on a heavier approach compared to their previous album Fate of Norns; according to vocalist Johan Hegg, in an interview with Dutch metal magazine Aardschok, the album would go back to their roots such as their debut, Once Sent from the Golden Hall. When asked about the meaning of the album's title, Hegg remarked:
The album cover art features the Norse God Odin riding on his fabled octopedal horse Sleipnir in a depiction borrowed from the Tjängvide image stone. The background depicts the Valknut, a symbol whose meaning is uncertain, though archeological evidence clearly shows it to be associated with Odin. Letters of the Runic alphabet can be seen on the edges of the triangles forming the Valknut. The Runes on top spell out "With Oden on our Side", whereas the bottom right runes spell "Amon Amarth" using characters from the Elder Futhark.
With Oden on Our Side was well received by the public. On Rate Your Music the album has an average rating of 3.69 of 5, based on more than 2,300 ratings, and on Sputnikmusic the album has an "excellent" average rating of 4.0 of 5, based on more than 1,250 ratings.
All songs written and composed by Amon Amarth. 
Johan Hegg − vocals
Olavi Mikkonen − guitar
Johan Söderberg − guitar
Ted Lundström − bass
Fredrik Andersson − drums
Jens Bogren – production, engineering, mixing
Anders "Shadow" Ström – additional recording
Thomas Eberger – mastering
Fascination Street studios, Örebro, Sweden
Cutting Room, Stockholm – mastering
Amon Amarth's rehearsal studio – recording (2006 demos)
Sunlight Studio – recording (1997 demos)
