Équinoxe (English: "equinox") is an album by French musician Jean Michel Jarre, released on Disques Dreyfus (with license to Polydor) in December 1978.
Parts 1 to 4 (i.e. side A) and tracks 5 to 8 (side B) segue smoothly from one to the next.
Jarre had developed his sound, employing more dynamic and rhythmic elements, particularly a greater use of sequencing on basslines. Much of this was achieved using custom equipment developed by his collaborator Michel Geiss.
The album reached number 11 on the UK Album Chart and number 126 on the US Billboard 200 chart.
During the 1980s, "Équinoxe Part 4" was used in the opening credits of the TVNZ documentary series Our World.
Two singles were released from the album, "Équinoxe Part 5" first, and then "Équinoxe Part 4". The short piece of music at the beginning of "Équinoxe Part 8" has been played live with different arrangements, including a version for an acoustic street organ, under the title of "Band in the Rain".
The release was followed by a concert on the Place de la Concorde, Paris on 14 July 1979. The concert attracted 1 million people, becoming Jarre's first entry in the Guinness Book of Records for the largest crowd for an outdoor concert.
As with Jarre's previous album, reviews for Équinoxe in the UK were unfavourable. Melody Maker's review at the time of Équinoxe's release scorned the record, saying "it is as slushily, pseudo-galactically crass and vapid as last year's Oxygène. The melodies are trite, harmonies predictable, textures almost determinedly hackneyed (even down to artificial 'weather' effects to generate mood). There isn't even much that's danceable."
A retrospective review by Allmusic commented, "As the follow up album to Oxygène, Équinoxe offers the same mesmerizing affect, with rapid spinning sequencer washes and bubbling synthesizer portions all lilting back and forth to stardust scatterings of electronic pastiches. Using more than 13 different types of synthesizers, Jarre combines whirling soundscapes of multi-textured effects, passages, and sometimes suites to culminate interesting electronic atmospheres... So much electronic color is added to every track that it is impossible to concentrate on any particular segment, resulting in waves of synth drowning the ears at high tide."
Side one
"Équinoxe Part 1" – 2:25
"Équinoxe Part 2" – 5:00
"Équinoxe Part 3" – 5:09
"Équinoxe Part 4" – 6:54
Side two
"Équinoxe Part 5" – 3:54
"Équinoxe Part 6" – 3:28
"Équinoxe Part 7" – 7:06
"Équinoxe Part 8" – 4:57
Jean-Michel Jarre – ARP 2600 Synthesizer, EMS Synthi AKS, VCS 3 Synthesizer, Yamaha CS-60, Oberheim TVS-1A, RMI Harmonic Synthesizer, RMI Keyboard Computer, ELKA 707, Korg Polyphonic Ensemble 2000, Eminent 310U, Mellotron, ARP Sequencer, Oberheim Digital Sequencer, GEISS Matrisequencer 250, GEISS Rhythmicomputer (a custom designed programmable rhythm box), EMS Vocoder
