"Use Somebody" is a song by the American alternative rock group Kings of Leon. It was the second single from the band's fourth studio album Only by the Night (2008), released on December 8, 2008.
The single received heavy airplay in Scandinavia, the Republic of Ireland, Germany, the United Kingdom and Australia, where it was number one on the Official Airplay Chart for six consecutive weeks. It was a huge success in the U.S., where it topped multiple airplay formats and reached number four on the Hot 100 and number one on the Pop Songs chart. The song received positive reviews and won the Grammy Award for Record of the Year, Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and Best Rock Song and was also nominated for Song of the Year.
The song has received generally positive reviews from music critics. Mikael Wood of Entertainment Weekly called "Use Somebody" a highlight of the album, describing the song as "a too-cool hipster's cry for comfort". Nick Levine of Digital Spy said, "With its Springsteen-style 'oooah-woooah's, gathering storm of guitars and lusty, longing vocals from Caleb Followill, it's nearly as infectious as 'Sex on Fire'." Gavin Haynes of NME praised the song as "easily the best 80s power ballad of 2008", but cautioned that the band "may be in danger of mistaking bluster for brilliance".
In the United States, "Use Somebody" became the band's mainstream breakthrough. Peaking at number four on the Hot 100, it gave the band their first top five hit there, and spent 57 weeks on the chart. On United States radio, the song was a multi-format smash, becoming just the fourth song in history to top the Mainstream Top 40, Adult Top 40, Alternative Songs, and Triple A charts. (Preceding it were "Slide" by the Goo Goo Dolls, "Every Morning" by Sugar Ray, and "Boulevard of Broken Dreams" by Green Day.) The song first reached number one on the Billboard Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart (now called the "Alternative" chart), their second of three consecutive singles to top that chart. "Use Somebody" also reached number one on the Adult Top 40 Chart, and later topped the Mainstream Top 40 as well. It reached over 4 million in sales in the US by July 2013. As of January 2015, the song has sold 4.3 million copies in the US.
In the United Kingdom, "Use Somebody" peaked at number two on the official UK Top 75 and spent an unbroken 40 weeks on the chart, only dropping out due to the surge in sales of Michael Jackson titles immediately after his death; after an absence of just one week it was back for another 20 weeks, peaking at #25. It has reappeared on further occasions since, and has now spent 77 weeks on the Top 75, making it the 5th longest runner of all time, just two places behind "Sex on Fire" with its 90 weeks.
Pixie Lott performed a cover version of the song which peaked at number 41 in the UK Singles Chart, due to it being a B-side to her number 1 single "Mama Do (Uh Oh Uh Oh)".
Dutch singer Laura Jansen covered a piano ballad-version of "Use Somebody". The song debuted in the Dutch Top 40. It entered the charts on the 35th spot but quickly rose towards number 14.
Country singer Margaret Durante did a cover and released a single on October 2009.
English electronic music group Ultrabeat released their cover as a single in 2009. The song peaked at No. 100 on the UK Singles Chart
Scala & Kolacny Brothers covered the song with the all-girls choir for their album Circle. A video produced for their cover was nominated for an MTV freshman video award.
American singer Anastacia released this song on her fifth studio album It's A Man's World.
CD single
"Use Somebody" - 3:51
"Knocked Up" (Lykke Li vs. Rodeo Remix) - 5:34
iTunes exclusive EP
"Use Somebody" - 3:51
"Knocked Up" (Lykke Li vs. Rodeo Remix) - 5:34
"Frontier City" - 3:36
"The Bucket" (CSS Remix) - 3:43
List of best-selling singles
List of best-selling singles in the United States
List of Mainstream Top 40 number-one hits of 2009 (U.S.)
Ultratop 50 number-one hits of 2009
Number one modern rock hits of 2009
