Dangerous and Moving is the second English-language album by t.A.T.u. The album was first released on 5 October 2005 in Japan then on 10 October in the UK, 11 October in North America, and in Europe and Latin America, on 14 October. The album has sold more than 3,500,000 copies worldwide, including 93,000 in the United States.
Production on Dangerous and Moving spanned from Los Angeles to London and Moscow. There were two notable recording sessions with the record's producer, Sergio Galoyan. The first took place in Moscow between 4 and 20 August 2004 with just Lena, producing songs like "Cosmos", "Sacrifice" (one demo featuring Claire Guy) and demos "All My Love" (an English counterpart to "Вся моя любовь"), "I Know", "One Love" and "You". The second recording session took place from 17 January to 18 April 2005 in Los Angeles with "Sacrifice", "Perfect Enemy" and the demo of "We Shout" (titled "Reach Out") also sung by Lena. Yulia was not present during the recording sessions due to her pregnancy.
Other demo versions of the songs are available online, such as "All About Us" (performed by The Veronicas), "Sacrifice" (with both Yulia and Lena), "Perfect Enemy" (recorded by Claire Guy and sometimes referred to as "Wrap It Up"), and "Обезьянка ноль".
Although Sting, Dave Stewart, Richard Carpenter, The Veronicas and Claire Guy did work on the album, they did not actually meet the girls for production. Sergio Galoyan became a liaison for the production. However, Richard Carpenter did meet the girls after the recording of the album at their video shoot for the single Friend or Foe. The video was shot on location at Bronson Cave in Hollywood, directed by James Cox, while the executive producer was Grant Cihlar for 1171 Production Group. According to the booklet, the album was recorded at eight different recording studios. The album cover photography and design was made by their own music group, TA Music.
There are only two shared tracks between both releases:
"All About Us"
"Loves Me Not"
Five tracks are Russian/English counterparts:
"Обезьянка ноль" / "Null and Void" (featured later on the compilation album The Best)
"Люди инвалиды" / "Dangerous And Moving"
"Космос" / "Cosmos (Outer Space)"
"Ничья" / "We Shout"
"Новая модель" / "Perfect Enemy"
On this album, "Loves Me Not" has different music than the version on the Russian album counterpart Люди Инвалиды. This is not a remix—it is the same single featuring a more pop arrangement for the international market versus a more electronic arrangement for the Russian market. An English version of "Вся моя любовь" was never officially released despite the demo recording. The girls sing an extra verse in "Cosmos (Outer Space)" after the second chorus; in "Космос", this is an instrumental break with no lyrics.
"All About Us" was the lead single of the album, released in September 2005. It became a top-10 hit across Europe and the world. Peaking at number 8 in the UK Singles Chart and number 6 in the European Hot 100. Also it reached number 13 in the US Billboard Hot Dance Club Play chart. The video won Best Video MTV Russia 2006.
"Friend or Foe" was released as the second single in December 2005. It peaked at number 33 in the European Hot 100 and number 48 in the UK Singles Chart.
"Gomenasai" was released as the third single in Latin America and Asia and as the second in some European territories in May 2006. It wasn't released in the United States and the United Kingdom. The single reached number 59 in the European Hot 100.
The Deluxe limited edition comes with a fold-out guitar/piano music poster for "Gomenasai" and a bonus DVD containing "The Making of All About Us" video shoot (including the finished, edited video at the end of the program) and a t.A.T.u. Remix Package that has isolated sounds for guitar, bass, drums, synths and vocals for the track "Loves Me Not".
t.A.T.u. - Vocals
Tom Baker — Mastering
Ed Buller - Producer
Cindy Cooper — Production Coordination
Sergio Galoyan - Producer, Composer
Trevor Horn - Producer
Tomoko Itoki — Product Manager
David Junk — Executive Director
Martin Kierszenbaum - Producer, A&R
Andy Kubiszewski - Producer
Robert Orton - Producer, Engineer, Mixing
Boris Renski — Executive Producer
Andrea Ruffalo — A&R
Ami Spishock — Product Manager
T.A. Music - Design, Photography, Concept
Tony Ugval — Engineer
Xudoznik — Producer
"Intro"
"Dangerous and Moving/"Lyudi Invalidy
"All About Us"
"Loves Me Not"
"Sacrifice"
"Chto Ne Khvatayet"
"We Shout"/ Nichya
"Friend or Foe"
"Obezyanka Nol"
"Gomenasai
"Perfect Enemy"/ Novaya Model
"Show Me Love"
"How Soon Is Now"
"30 Minutes"/ 30 Minut
"Not Gonna Get Us"/"Nas Ne Dagoniat"
"Ne Ve,Ne Boysia"
"All The Things She Said"/"Ya Soshla S Uma"
Cosmos(Outer Space)
One Love
I Know
Reach Out
You (I Miss You)
All My Love
Wrap It Up
Dangerous and Moving Tour - The Associated Tour
Truth: Live in St. Petersburg
