Travelling: Songs from Studios, Stages, Hotelrooms, and other strange Places is the ninth studio album by Swedish pop music duo Roxette, released 26 March 2012 by EMI.
Originally titled Tourism 2, the album is a direct sequel to the 1992 album of the same name. The album's name went through several revisions before release − including 2rism and T2 − on the insistence of record label EMI, who claimed that "titles with numbers aren't good".
The album entered the top ten in four countries, including Sweden and Germany, and was preceded by lead single "It's Possible" on 2 March 2012.
This is Roxette's first studio album to be released in the US since 1994's Crash! Boom! Bang! in 18 years. Excluding the 2000 re-release of their compilation album Don't Bore Us, Get to the Chorus!.
Much like the original Tourism album, Travelling matches its predecessor in that it features a mix of both new songs and re-workings of previously unreleased older material. "See Me", which was originally an out-take from the Crash! Boom! Bang! sessions and released on the "Salvation" single, appears on the album in a "totally new recording, except Marie's [vocal]", while "Turn of the Tide" was written during the Have a Nice Day sessions in 1998 and first recorded during the Travelling sessions in a studio in Sun City. "Touched by the Hand of God" was originally the title track of their previous studio album Charm School. The album also contains "The Weight of the World", which first appeared as a b-side on the "A Thing About You" single in 2002, and a new version of "Perfect Excuse" from Per Gessle's 2008 solo album Party Crasher featuring shared vocal duties between Marie and Helena Josefsson. This will be the first track in Roxette's history not to feature any backing vocals from Gessle, who explained that he "always wanted to hear Marie sing that song, 'cause it's beautiful. On my album, it's me singing the verse and Helena doing the chorus, and this is just Marie and Helena singing it. It's [...] very different to the original."
The album also features three live songs, including a live version of "She's Got Nothing On (But the Radio)" recorded in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil on 16 April 2011, a performance of "Stars" taken from a soundcheck in Dubai on 20 May 2011, and an orchestral performance of "It Must Have Been Love" from their Night of the Proms set in Rotterdam in 2009.
All songs written and composed by Per Gessle, except "See Me" composed by Marie Fredriksson. 
