Curtain Call: The Hits is the first greatest hits compilation album by American rapper Eminem. It was released on December 6, 2005, under Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment and Eminem's Shady Records. The album collects Eminem's most popular singles, as well as four new songs, including a live version of "Stan", featuring English singer and songwriter Elton John from the 43rd Grammy Awards, plus new songs "Fack", "When I'm Gone" and "Shake That" featuring Nate Dogg.
The album was certified triple platinum in the United States, Australia and the United Kingdom, and quadruple platinum in New Zealand. It reached number one on several charts, including the UK and US Albums Chart.
Curtain Call: The Hits debuted at number 1 on the UK Albums Chart and Billboard 200, after two sales days, in a similar fashion to Eminem's previous album Encore. The album racked up first-week sales of nearly 441,000 and with close to 324,000 scans the second week for a two-week stay at number one. It slipped from no. 1 to no. 4 in its third week but surged 33 percent to finish with sales close to 430,000. The disc scored nearly 1.2 million scans in its first three weeks of release. It also gave Eminem his fifth straight number 1 album in the US and UK when including the 8 Mile soundtrack. Curtain Call was certified triple-platinum by the RIAA in the United States. As of November 2013, the record has sold 3,782,000 copies in the United States.
The album's two singles, "When I'm Gone" and "Shake That", peaked at numbers 8 and 6 respectively in the US Billboard Hot 100. Only "When I'm Gone" qualified for the charts in the UK, where it peaked at #4.
A clean version of the album is also available. It has 15 tracks with both "Intro" and "Fack" removed and "My Name Is" put to track one. The tracks appear exactly how they appeared on the clean versions of their respective albums except for the song "Guilty Conscience", which adds a chorus. Certain profanities remain on several tracks, as words including "shit", "bitch", and "ass" were not censored on The Slim Shady LP or The Marshall Mathers LP. However, on "Just Lose It", the clean version leaves "ass" uncensored, while on the album Encore, the word "ass" was replaced with "thing".
Jeff Bass – Bass, Guitar, Keyboards
Karin Catt – Photography
Larry Chatman – Project Coordinator
Lindsay Collins – Studio Coordinator
Tommy Coster – Keyboards
DJ Head – Drum Programming
Dr. Dre – Producer, Mixing
Eminem – Producer, Executive Producer, Drum Programming, Mixing
The 45 King & Louie – Producer
Marti Frederiksen – Engineer
Brian "Big Bass" Gardener – Mastering
Scott Hays – Assistant Engineer
Richard "Segal" Herredia – Engineer
Mauricio Iragorri – Engineer
Ben Jost – Assistant Engineer
Rouble Kapoor – Assistant Engineer
Steven King – Bass, Guitar, Engineer, Mixing
Anthony Mandler – Photography
Jonathan Mannion – Photography
Joe Perry Project – Solo Instrumental
Kirdis Postelle – Project Coordinator
Luis Resto – Keyboards, Programming, Producer
Tom Rounds – Assistant Engineer
Les Scurry – Production Coordination
Mike Sroka – Assistant Engineer
Urban Kris – Assistant Engineer
Nitin Vadukul – Photography
