Just Dance 2 is a music game developed and published by Ubisoft Paris and Ubisoft Milan for the Wii. It is the sequel to Just Dance. It was released in North America on October 12, 2010 and in Australia and Europe on October 14, 2010. The Best Buy Edition was released in North America on November 21, 2010. There are 44 new tracks and new modes. A sequel, Just Dance 3, was released in October 2011.
The gameplay of Just Dance 2 remains similar to the original; while holding a Wii Remote in their hand, players must mimic the routine of an on-screen dancer to a chosen song. Players are judged based on their accuracy, scoring points.
Selected songs offer "Duet" modes, which feature choreography designed for two players. A new mode known as "Dance Battle" was also introduced; it is a team-based mode in which players compete across a series of songs and minigames to earn points for their team. The mode can be played with up to eight players, divided into two teams of four. A new exercise-focused gameplay mode known as "Just Sweat" was also added; the mode is designed to serve as a daily exercise regiment, allowing players to select an intensity-based selection of songs with progress tracked via "sweat points".
The game contains 47 music tracks, and additional downloadable content (DLC).
An (A) indicates the song has alternate dances available. (Those can be found under 'Contest Winners' in the 'Extras' menu)
A (J2) indicates the song is also available in Just Dance Wii 2.
A (X-3D) indicates the song is also available as DLC in Just Dance 3. (Xbox 360 only)
A (BBE) indicates the song is on the Best Buy edition of the game. (United States only)
A Funkytown Previously Game From Rayman Raving Rabbids 2
A (FRDLC) indicates that the song can be downloaded for free.
A (DLC*) indicates that the song was free, but switched to 300 Wii Points.
A (X-3D) indicates the song is also available as DLC in Just Dance 3. (Xbox 360 only)
Just Dance 2 received mixed to positive reviews. Metacritic lists the game with an aggregate score of 74, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Sales of Just Dance 2 surpassed those of the original; with over 5 million copies as of January 2011, it was the best-selling third-party title for the Wii. Laurent Detoc, CEO of Ubisoft's North American operations, stated that this achievement "[solidified] the Just Dance brand as a pop culture phenomenon."
GameSpot praised the improved quality of Just Dance 2 over its predecessor, acknowledging improvements such as "tighter" motion detection that is harder to "cheat", increased production values, and higher-quality character and background art design. The diverse soundtrack and choreography was also praised, with the "Duet" routines judged as being the "funniest" to play because of their "comical spins, jumps, and crossovers". Just Dance 2 was commended for continuing to be more enjoyable as a multiplayer party game, while the addition of minigames and DLC were considered changes that added additional value to the game as a whole. In conclusion, GameSpot noted that "considering the lack of a career mode, rewards, or a modicum of challenge in single-player, it would be easy to dismiss Just Dance 2 as a shallow cash-in sequel that has learnt little from the mistakes of its predecessor. However, that would be entirely missing the point. Get a group of friends together and it dishes out heaps of fun, with an excellent soundtrack and hilarious choreography that anyone can dance to and ultimately make a fool out of himself to."
IGN.com noted that although it still had "absolutely no depth or subtlety", Just Dance 2 was still "tremendously enjoyable", continuing to eschew unlockable content and progression in favor of focusing on the core gameplay experience, and for being more polished overall. In regards to its competitors, it was also noted that the game "[had] the edge [over Dance Central] because you don't have to buy a £130 camera in order to play it." Giving the game an 8 out of 10, IGN concluded that Just Dance 2 was "refreshingly uncomplicated fun", and would appeal to people "who like to dance and aren't particularly bothered about games."
