"All Together Now" is a song by the Beatles written primarily by Paul McCartney and credited to Lennon–McCartney. The song was recorded during the band's Magical Mystery Tour period, but remained unreleased until it was included on the Yellow Submarine soundtrack. It was released as a single in 1972 in European countries such as France and Germany, backed by "Hey Bulldog".
McCartney described the song as a children's sing-along with the title phrase inspired by the music hall tradition of asking the audience to join in. He also described a "subcurrent" in the song, a dual-meaning where "we are all together now." According to music critic Tom Maginnis of AllMusic, McCartney created the song "to match the same light-hearted spirit" of "Yellow Submarine".
"All Together Now" appears in an animated sequence in the film Yellow Submarine, and is also introduced by the Beatles themselves in a final live-action scene of the film. During the latter scene, translations of "All Together Now" into various languages appear written on-screen.
The track was recorded on 12 May 1967 at Abbey Road Studios and mixed the same day, but was not released until 13 January 1969, when it appeared on the soundtrack album. George Martin was absent from this session, leaving recording engineer Geoff Emerick in charge of the control room. The song took less than six hours to record and was recorded in nine takes, the last of which was selected for overdubs
Paul McCartney – lead vocals, bass guitar, acoustic guitar, handclaps
John Lennon – double-tracked lead vocals (middle eight), backing vocals, ukulele, harmonica, handclaps
George Harrison – backing vocals, acoustic guitar, handclaps
Ringo Starr – backing vocals, drums, finger cymbals, handclaps
Personnel per Ian MacDonald
Mark Lewisohn reported that the "party-style" backing vocals were provided by "whoever happened to be around".
Paul McCartney performed the song live for the first time by any Beatle on 4 May 2013 at the Estádio Mineirão, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. He subsequently played it throughout his 2013–15 Out There! Tour.
"All Together Now" has been covered by various artists. Versions intended for children have been released by the Sugarbeats, the Bingo Kids and others.
A German group, Joy Unlimited, did a heavy funk-rock version that music critic Richie Unterberger of AllMusic described as "an oddball obscure Beatles' cover".
The Muppets covered the song as the final track for their 1994 album Kermit Unpigged.
Andre 3000 of the duo OutKast covered the song for a Nike commercial that ran during the 2010 NBA Finals.
Kenny Loggins covered it on his 2009 album All Join In.
In 2011, Sprint began using versions of the song to promote its wireless services in the US. Portuguese mobile phone company Optimus used it the same year as part of a new advertising campaign.
Tally Hall performed a cover of this in conjunction with Casey Shea and Speak as a planned encore at the 7th Street Entry stop on their Good & Evil tour.
Glove & Boots made a video of the song, with the puppet Mario coming up with his own lyrics while Fa-Fa and the rest sing a reasonably faithful version of the song.
Kohl's used a version of the song in their Christmas 2015 television commercials.
All Together Now, a feature-length documentary about the Cirque du Soleil project Love.
