Soulwax, composed of David Dewaele, Stephen Dewaele, Stefaan Van Leuven and Bent Van Looy, are an alternative rock/electronic band from Ghent, Belgium. They were first noticed after the release of their album Much Against Everyone's Advice, but after that the Dewaeles started focusing on their other projects such as 2manydjs (first known as The Fucking Dewaele Brothers/The Flying Dewaele Brothers). Their album As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2 was named the best popular music album of 2002 by The New York Times. They were also hosting a show on Belgian television, 'Alter8'.
The 2004 album Any Minute Now spawned three singles in "E Talking", "NY Excuse" and the title track. "E Talking"'s music video was controversial and restricted to post-watershed broadcast on music television channels. Set in London's Fabric nightclub, everyone in the video is depicted as being on a different drug, from A-Z (including popular drug nicknames). [1]
The group has also produced a number of official and unofficial remixes, including "Daft Punk Is Playing At My House" and "Get Innocuous!" by LCD Soundsystem, "Robot Rock" by Daft Punk and "DARE" by Gorillaz. They are friends of artists Tiga, LCD Soundsystem and Whomadewho. The album Nite Versions (2005) is a collection of remixes of tracks from the album Any Minute Now.
In January 2006, Soulwax released their second remix album. The album, titled This Is Radio Soulwax, was covermount into the February 2006 issue of Mixmag. Their third remix album, Part of NYE Never Dies was also covermount into Mixmag, this time in late 2008.
In summer 2006, Soulwax completed a 'Nite Version remix' of Gossip's "Standing in the Way of Control", as well as their 'Ravelight Dub' and 'Ravelight Vocal Mix' of Robbie Williams' "Lovelight". The summer 2006 tour was filmed by director Saam Farahmand, and resulted in a Radio Soulwax documentary, "Radio Soulwax".
In August 2006, Soulwax were working on tracks for the new album from Tiga. In late 2006, it was announced in Belgian magazine HUMO that David and Stephen Dewaele had formed a band with Shane Doran and his brother in-law Fergadelic called Die Verboten.
In 2007, Soulwax produced remixes of "Gravity's Rainbow" by Klaxons, and "Phantom Pt. II" by Justice. Remixes for "Ice Cream" by New Young Pony Club and "Pogo" by Digitalism had been rumoured, but were never completed.
Soulwax, under the guise of 2manydjs, headlined their own 'Radio Soulwax' tent at the Rock Ness Festival held on 9 June 2007. The following day at Rock Ness Festival, they played a Soulwax Nite Versions show in the 'Clash Arena'. Later that month, they took part in the Wild in the Country event at Knebworth Park on 30 June 2007. In December 2007, they held Radio Soulwax-mas, a massive X-mas party in Flanders Expo with guests such as Tiga, Erol Alkan, Boys Noize, Justice, Riton, Mixhell, Daniele Baldelli, Hong Kong Dong, Das Pop, Goose, Milk Inc, etc.
Soulwax have also produced the debut album by fellow Belgians Das Pop. The album will be released in the UK in 2009.
In 2009 December, Soulwax produced a song, entitled "We Love Animals", for Crookers with Mixhell. In addition, Soulwax produced the song "Talk to Me" by Peaches.
The only official compilation As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2, was released in 2002 and is composed of 45 tracks the Dewaele brothers were able to clear the rights from. They originally requested rights for 187 tracks and got clearances for 114 of them. 62 were refused and 11 remained untraceable.
All the unofficial releases (As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 1 and 3 through 11) are in fact a compilation of the Radio Soulwax shows 2manydjs did for various radios including Studio Brussel (Belgium), Radio 1 (UK), KISS 100 (UK) and Eins live (Germany).
As part of the Vivid Live Festival in Sydney, David and Stephen Dewaele behind 2manydjs and electro-rock outfit Soulwax presented a one-off series of radio shows on 'Triple J' Australian national radio station. The series was broadcast nationally 6pm nightly from 31 May 2011 to 3 June 2011.
The 2001 track "Theme from Discothèque" is by David and Stephen Dewaele from Soulwax, under the name Samantha Fu. They produced this track for a Ghent-based dancegroup called Kung Fu.
On February 2, 2009, Soulwax made a guest appearance on BBC Radio 1, playing 420 song introductions in a period of 60 minutes.
In 2004 Soulwax compiled the soundtrack for the Belgian movie Steve + Sky. Soulwax contributed three instrumental tracks on this compilation under the name "Kawazaki".
Soulwax's remix of the Rolling Stones' "You Can't Always Get What You Want" is the credit song of, and featured in the movie 21.
Director Saam Farahmand has filmed Soulwax on their international dates (2005–2007), capturing all the excitement, chaos and humour of the world tour. Soulwax filmed 120 shows with one camera in Europe, Japan, US, Latin America and Australia. This resulted in 2 films entitled "Part of the Weekend Never Dies"; a live music film and a documentary which includes 2manydjs, Soulwax Nite Versions and features James Murphy, Nancy Whang, Erol Alkan, Tiga, Justice, Busy P, The Naked Guy, So-Me, Peaches, Kitsuné, Klaxons and many more in behind the scenes footage, interviews, etc. As of April 2008, Soulwax's clubbing film/documentary Radio Soulwax is finished. They performed a sold out gig at the London Royal Festival Hall, during which they did a première of the film. It came out on DVD September 2008.
Soulwax composed the soundtrack for the 2016 film Belgica by Felix Van Groeningen.
Soulwax's current project is a website called Radio Soulwax, in which a continuous mix will be playing all day. It will feature 24 hour-long mixes with visuals similar to those used in the 2manydjs live sets, and will include music from many different decades. After they complete this project, they have stated in interviews that they will work on their next studio album.Soulwax - Machine was conceived and directed by Saam Farahmand, who was inspired to create an interpretation of the ethos behind the project. The result is a film featuring renowned model Marilyn Rose that encapsulates the audio visual obsession of Radio Soulwax. The film was previsualised, edited and post produced by The House of Curves in London.
Soulwax contributed to the soundtrack of Grand Theft Auto V. They hosted and supplied the playlist to the in-game radio station "Soulwax FM".
Leave the Story Untold (1996) (produced by Chris Goss)
Much Against Everyone's Advice (1998)
Any Minute Now (2004)
Nite Versions (2005)
This Is Radio Soulwax (2006)
Most of the remixes... (2007)
Belgica (2016)
unofficial
"Most of the Other Remixes..."
It is an album with most of the remixes that weren't included in Most of the Remixes.
dEUS – "Everybody's Weird"
Einstürzende Neubauten – "Stella Maris"
Kolk – "Uma"
Tahiti 80 – "Heartbeat"
Zita Swoon – "My Bond With You And Your Planet: Disco!"
Muse – "Muscle Museum"
Miss Kittin – "Requiem for a Hit (2 Many DJs Remix)"
Lords of Acid – "I Sit on Acid 2000"
Sugababes – "Round Round"
Arthur Argent – "Hold Your Head Up"
Chaka Khan – "I Feel You"
Whitey – "Leave Them All Behind"
Kylie Minogue – "Can't Get You out of My Head"
Ladytron – "Seventeen"
Playgroup – "Make It Happen"
DJ Shadow – "Six Days"
David Bowie – "Rebel Rebel"
Felix Da Housecat – "Rocket Ride"
LCD Soundsystem – "Daft Punk Is Playing at My House"
Daft Punk – "Robot Rock"
Gorillaz – "Dare"
The Gossip – "Standing in the Way of Control"
Robbie Williams – "Lovelight"
Klaxons – "Gravity's Rainbow"
Justice – "Phantom Pt. II"
LCD Soundsystem – "Get Innocuous"
Hot Chip – "Ready for the Floor"
Human Resource vs 808 State – "Dominator"
West Phillips – "Sucker For A Pretty Face"
Rolling Stones – "You Can't Always Get What You Want"
Walter Murphy & The Big Apple Band – "A Fifth of Beethoven"
The Chemical Brothers – "Hey Boy Hey Girl"
Tiga – "Mind Dimension 2"
MGMT – "Kids"
Dizzee Rascal – "Bonkers"
Paul Chambers – "Yeah, Techno!"
LCD Soundsystem – "You Wanted A Hit"
Late Of The Pier – "Best In The Class"
Goose - "Synrise"
Joe Goddard – "Gabriel"
Arcade Fire − "Sprawl II: (Mountains Beyond Mountains)"
Pulp – "After You"
Metronomy − "Love Letters"
Jungle − "Julia"
Tame Impala − "Let It Happen"
Hot Chip - "Huarache Lights"
Tiga - Sexor (2006)
Tiga - Ciao! (2009)
Das Pop - Das Pop
Peaches - "Talk to Me" (2009)
Crookers - "We Love Animals (with Mixhell)" (2010)
Official compilations
As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 2 (2002)
Unofficial compilations
These unofficial compilations are bootleg recordings of radio shows that 2manydjs did for Studio Brussel.
12 albums - As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 0 to As Heard on Radio Soulwax Pt. 11
Hang All DJs (all volumes)
A bootleg recording of their Essential Mix for BBC Radio 1 in 2005 was released under the title 50,000,000 Soulwax Fans Can't Be Wrong.
