Time and a Word is the second studio album by the English progressive rock band Yes, released on 24 July 1970 by Atlantic Records. Following the commercial failure of their first album, Yes, the group continued to follow their early musical direction of performing original material and cover versions of songs by pop, jazz, and folk artists. Time and a Word also includes songs with orchestral arrangements.
Time and a Word became the group's first release to enter the UK chart at #45. It however failed to chart in the US and received mixed reviews from critics. During their UK tour in April 1970, guitarist Peter Banks was fired from the group. By the time of the album's release, he was replaced by Steve Howe who is photographed with the group on the North American issue. In 2003, the album was remastered with several previously unreleased tracks.
Jon Anderson's decision to use a live orchestra on most of the album's songs (as he reported in the Yesyears video) put him very much at odds with Peter Banks. Tensions within the band increased, and just after the album's recording was completed in early 1970, Banks was asked to leave. Steve Howe would join the line-up, as a replacement, that March. The album includes two songs written by Anderson with David Foster, a former bandmate in The Warriors.
Time and a Word's use of a studio orchestra seemed intrusive to some critics, and the album's reception was lukewarm. The opening track contains an orchestral intro to Richie Havens' song "No Opportunity Necessary, No Experience Needed", featuring a main theme from the 1958 film The Big Country by Jerome Moross.The track "The Prophet" borrows from Gustav Holst's "Jupiter" in the Planets Suite.
The album was recorded at Advision Studios in West London.
Note: Tracks 9–11 first appeared on early West German pressings.
The US and UK releases had different album artwork; the UK version used a black-and-white Dada-esque photo-montage of a nude woman with a butterfly, but this was deemed inappropriate in the US, so the cover there used a conventional photograph of the band. Despite appearing on the US cover, Howe does not play on the album. The back cover of both versions features photographs of Anderson, Squire, Kaye, Bruford and Banks.
Yes
Jon Anderson: lead vocals, percussion
Peter Banks: electric and acoustic guitars, vocals
Chris Squire: bass guitar, vocals
Tony Kaye: Hammond organ, piano
Bill Bruford: drums, percussion
Additional musicians
David Foster: vocals on "Sweet Dreams", acoustic guitar on "Time and a Word"
1989 – Atlantic – CD
1994 – Atlantic – CD (Remastered)
2003 – Rhino – CD (Remastered with bonus tracks)
2013 - Rhino - CD as part of The Studio Albums 1969-1987
Time and a Word CD booklet essay, Mike Tiano, c. 2003
AllMusicGuide.com
