Rage Against the Machine is the debut studio album by American rap metal band Rage Against the Machine. The album was released on November 3, 1992. It went to #1 on the Billboard Heatseekers chart, and #45 on the Billboard 200 chart.
"Know Your Enemy" features Tool vocalist Maynard James Keenan on "additional vocals", and also features Jane's Addiction drummer Stephen Perkins on trashcan percussion. Keenan has been known on occasion to appear onstage with the band to perform the song. The album cover features the self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức that occurred on June 11, 1963.
The cover features a photo of the self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức, a Vietnamese Buddhist monk, in Saigon in 1963. The monk was protesting President Ngô Đình Diệm's administration for oppressing the Buddhist religion. The photograph drew international attention and persuaded U.S. President John F. Kennedy to withdraw support for Ngô Đình Diệm's government. It was taken by Associated Press correspondent Malcolm Browne; a similar photograph earned the award of World Press Photo of the Year in 1963.
The songs on Rage Against the Machine all feature political messages. Activists such as Provisional IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands and Black Panther Party founder Huey P. Newton are listed in the "Thanks For Inspiration" section. Also thanked were Ian and Alec MacKaye—de la Rocha was straight edge at the time, though he later took up smoking.
The lyrics for each song were printed in the album booklet with the exception of those for "Killing in the Name", which were omitted; the booklet reads "2. KILLING IN THE NAME", skips the lyrics and continues with the next song.
The statement "no samples, keyboards or synthesizers used in the making of this record" can be found at the end of the sleeve notes. Similar statements were made in the band's subsequent albums. The band also refer to themselves as "Guilty Parties" for each album.
The album was supported by the Rage Against the Machine Tour which commenced in early 1993 and concluded on December 31, 1993.
After an online campaign to get Rage Against the Machine to Christmas Number One in the UK, the track "Killing in the Name" reached Number One on the singles chart during Christmas 2009. When invited to play it live on BBC Radio 5 Live, they agree on-air to omit the swearing that features at the end. But true to Rage Against the Machine style, de la Rocha does not disappoint fans and sings the original, "Fuck you, I won't do what you tell me!"
The band announced on October 9, 2012, via their Facebook page that they would be releasing a special 20th anniversary boxset to commemorate the group's debut album. The boxset contains never-before-released concert material, including the band's 2010 Finsbury Park show and footage from early in their career, as well as a digitally-remastered version of the album, b-sides and the original demo tape (on disc for the first time). The collection was released on November 27, 2012.
The release features 3 distinct versions:
Deluxe Box Set featuring two CDs, two DVDs, one 12" 180gm vinyl LP, one 40 page booklet and two-sided poster
Special Edition featuring two CDs and a bonus DVD featuring six tracks
Single compact disc (with three bonus tracks)
Allmusic reviewer Eduardo Rivadavia gave the album four and a half stars and stated "it was the first album to successfully merge the seemingly disparate sounds of rap and heavy metal", he also praised the album's "meaningful rhymes and emotionally charged conviction".
In 2001, Q magazine named Rage Against the Machine as one of the 50 Heaviest Albums Of All Time. The album is included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die. In 2012, the album was ranked number 365 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time.
Acclaimed BBC Radio 1 DJ Zane Lowe named Rage Against the Machine as one of four 'Masterpieces'. This was his best album, on December 2, 2008.
In October 2011, Rage Against the Machine was ranked number five on Guitar World magazine's top ten list of guitar albums of 1992.
All songs written and composed by Rage Against the Machine (Tim Commerford, Zack de la Rocha, Tom Morello, Brad Wilk). 
Anger Is a Gift bonus disc – released with the 1995 Australian CD re-release
"Darkness" – 3:40
"Year of tha Boomerang" – 4:02
"Freedom" (Remix) – 6:14
"Take the Power Back" (Live) – 6:12
Bonus Maxi 12" from the "Limited Tour Edition" red vinyl 1993 European re-release included this second LP labeled sides C and D
C1 "Freedom" (Live) – 6:13
C2 "Bombtrack" (From Mark Goodier's "Evening Session") – 4:08
C3 "Bullet in the Head" (Remix) – 5:40
D1 "Darkness of Greed" – 3:40
D2 "Bullet in the Head" (Live) – 5:44
D3 "Bombtrack" (Live) – 5:33
All songs from both bonuses are the versions from previously released singles and promos, except C1 which is from a different performance. No information is given on the 12" about the date nor venue.
Rage Against the Machine
Tim Commerford (credited as "Timmy C.") – bass guitar, backing vocals, production, art direction
Tom Morello – guitar, production, art direction
Zack de la Rocha – vocals, production, art direction
Brad Wilk – drums, percussion, production, art direction
Additional musicians
Maynard James Keenan – additional vocals on "Know Your Enemy"
Stephen Perkins – additional percussion on "Know Your Enemy"
Technical personnel
Craig Doubet – assistant engineer
Stan Katayama – engineer
Nicky Lindeman – art direction
Garth Richardson – production, engineering
Jeff Sheehan – assistant engineer
Steve Sisco – mixing assistant
Andy Wallace – mixing
Bob Ludwig – mastering (1992 CD and Vinyl)
Steve Hoffman - mastering (2016 Hybrid SACD)
