Miles Peter Kane (born 17 March 1986) is an English musician, best known as a solo artist and the co-frontman of the Last Shadow Puppets. He was also the former frontman of the Rascals, before the band announced their break-up in August 2009.
He is currently pursuing a solo career, and continues to be a part of the Last Shadow Puppets. His debut solo album, Colour of the Trap, was released on 9 May 2011 and the follow-up, Don't Forget Who You Are was released on 3 June 2013.
Born in Birkenhead, Wirral, an only child, he was raised in nearby Meols. Before learning the guitar, as a child Kane played the saxophone. Kane now supports the football team Liverpool F.C., despite giving exclusive interviews to The Sun newspaper and having previously followed Manchester United for nearly 20 years. Miles is also a close friend of Everton and England footballer Leighton Baines.
Kane has had relationships with models Agyness Deyn, Suki Waterhouse, and Tinna Bergs.  In 2015, he was named one of GQ's 50 best dressed British men. He is currently in a relationship with Hannah Ware.
Aged 18, Kane joined the Little Flames as guitarist alongside Eva Petersen (Vocals), Greg Mighall (Drums), Joe Edwards (Bass) and Matt Gregory (Guitar) in December 2004. The band signed to Deltasonic and were compared to label mates the Coral and high profile fans such as the Arctic Monkeys. They also went on to tour with bands like the Coral, the Zutons, the Dead 60s and the Arctic Monkeys. The band split in 2007 prior to releasing their debut album, which remains unreleased.
Kane, on vocals and lead guitar, was joined by Greg Mighall on drums and Joe Edwards on bass guitar and occasional backing vocals. Kane took on the main songwriting duties for the band. The band, who have known each other from childhood, continued where the Little Flames left off; they signed with Deltasonic Records again, only with fewer members this time. They were adamant to keep their own distinct sound of 'awesome rockin beats' with a 'psychedelic quirk' and a 'compelling and unique dark underlying spirit'1.
The Rascals released their debut EP in December 2007, just 7 months after they got together. Entitled Out of Dreams it featured 4 tracks, but did not achieve chart success. Yet they soon became tipped to be one of the bands of 2008, championed in particular by NME, following a well received support slot on the Arctic Monkeys' 2007 tour. Their first album 'Rascalize' was released on 23 June 2008. The Rascals have a small role in the film Awaydays playing an Echo & the Bunnymen cover.
Whilst touring with the Arctic Monkeys, Kane and front man Alex Turner began to play together backstage, which resulted in the composition of new tracks, realizing there was a future in their songwriting partnership, and the Last Shadow Puppets were born. The duo decided to travel to the West Coast of France with producer James Ford where they recorded their debut album The Age of the Understatement in just two weeks. Their album went straight to number 1 in the UK Album Charts with the single of the same name reaching number 1 in the Indie Single Charts, and subsequent singles also reaching high spots. They first played together live in the UK, doing a secret set at Glastonbury with a special guest appearance from Jack White, to whom Kane lent his iPod so White could learn the solo. The band's album narrowly missed out on the Nationwide Mercury Music Prize, but won the Mojo Breakthrough Award. In December 2015 it was confirmed on the band's official Facebook and YouTube accounts, that the second album was due in spring 2016.
In early 2009, after his last tour with the Rascals, Miles Kane left the band to focus on a solo career. Inspired by a classic, smart '60s Mod theme he signed with Columbia Records and began recording his solo album with Dan Carey and Dan the Automator, who had previously worked with Gorillaz and Kasabian.
Kane's debut single, "Inhaler" was released on 22 November 2010, and he did a series of solo shows throughout November, as well as supported the Courteeners at several shows in December. He then continued solo performances in January and February 2011, before supporting Beady Eye at eight shows in March. Kane released another single, "Come Closer" on 20 February 2011, reaching No. 85 on the UK Singles Chart. "Rearrange", the third single from his debut album, was released on 27 March 2011 and reached No. 149 on the UK Singles Chart.
The album, titled Colour of the Trap, was released on 9 May 2011. One track, "My Fantasy" features backing vocals from Noel Gallagher, while another, "Happenstance" is a duet between Kane and French actress Clémence Poésy. Half of the tracks on the album were co-written by Alex Turner, Kane's partner in the Last Shadow Puppets. Kane supported the Arctic Monkeys at two shows in Sheffield in June 2011, and was their support act on their Australian tour in January 2012. It was also announced on 19 October 2011 that Kane was to support Kasabian on their UK tour in December 2011.
On 24 February 2013, Kane released an EP titled Give Up, charting at No. 62. On 13 March 2013, Kane revealed he would be releasing his second album, entitled Don't Forget Who You Are, in the spring. On 19 March 2013, a UK tour in May and June to coincide with the album was announced. On 30 April 2013, Kane released the single "Don't Forget Who You Are", which features the B-side “Get Right” which was written by Kane and Alex Turner. The album was released on 3 June 2013, debuting at No. 8 in the UK charts. It was produced by Ian Broudie of The Lightning Seeds, and features two tracks co-written with Paul Weller ("Fire in My Heart" and "You're Gonna Get It").
Kane played the opening day of Glastonbury 2013 on the John Peel stage, before joining the Arctic Monkeys in their headline slot, to play on "505". Two further singles from the album, "Taking Over" and "Better Than That" were released in August and October 2013 respectively. In 2015, Kane collaborated with Mark Ronson on the opening track "Johanna" of the soundtrack to the film Mortdecai.
After mooted rumours of a new album with Alex Turner in Kane's other band The Last Shadow Puppets. On October 19, 2015, Owen Pallett, who contributed the string arrangements on The Age of the Understatement, confirmed work on a second The Last Shadow Puppets album. In November 2015, producer James Ford confirmed that work on the second album had been completed. 
On 10 January 2016, the band released their first single since 2008. The song, "Bad Habits", was accompanied with a music video filmed in the same style as the first two teaser trailers. On 21 January 2016, the band announced that their second album would be entitled Everything You've Come to Expect, and would feature the return of all three previous band members, as well as the addition of bass player Zach Dawes. The title track (Everything You've Come to Expect) was released as a single on 10 March 2016. It was followed by the release of "Aviation" on 16 March 2016 and the release of "Miracle Aligner" on 28 March 2016. The album was released on 1 April 2016.
The live band include George Moran (rhythm guitarist), Ben Parsons (keyboard), Phill Anderson (bass guitar), and Jay Sharrock (drums). Singer-songwriter and rhythm guitarist Eugene McGuinness left the band to continue with his own career.
Note: This only includes artist's solo career, not other projects such as the Last Shadow Puppets or the Rascals.
