Shock Value is the second solo album, and fifth album overall, by record producer and rapper Timbaland. It is Timbaland's first release on his own imprint, the Interscope Records-distributed Mosley Music Group. Shock Value features a long list of guest artists, among them Fall Out Boy, Justin Timberlake, The Hives, Keri Hilson, Nelly Furtado, Missy Elliott, 50 Cent, Tony Yayo, Dr. Dre, OneRepublic, Elton John, Magoo and Nicole Scherzinger.
"Release" is featured in the EA Sports game Madden NFL 08 and "The Way I Are" is also on the soundtrack of NBA Live 08. On April 16, the unreleased song "Laugh at 'Em" was leaked to the Internet. It was originally supposed to be on the album but was not completed in time. It features Jay-Z and Justin Timberlake. The song is now surnamed as the "Give It to Me" remix. Another unreleased track called "I See U", featuring Attitude and D.O.E., was also leaked to the internet.
An instrumental version of the album was released on the iTunes Store on July 31, 2007.
The album was supposed to be supported by a Shock Value 2008 Tour. The tour was to begin in Australia and continue to New Zealand, but was postponed and then cancelled because the expected amount that Showtime Touring was to pay Timbaland was unavailable, and the star refused to perform. There had also been many scheduling conflicts with Europe. The tour was cancelled one day before it was to begin.
Shock Value received generally mixed reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received a weighted mean score of 54, based on 24 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
The album debuted at #5 on the U.S. Billboard 200, with 138,000 copies sold. It debuted at number ten in the U.K. and on the week of July 22 climbed to number five. The album has since reached number two in the UK and number thirteen in France.
The album was certified Platinum in Canada (100,000 units) by the CRIA in August 2007. On the Australian ARIA Albums Chart, Shock Value was certified 3x Platinum with sales of 210,000+ copies. It reached the top of the album chart on the week beginning 12/31/2007.
In BBC Radio 1's end of year chart for 2007, Shock Value was the ninth best-selling album in the UK.
"Give It to Me" was released as the first single on March 15, 2007. It peaked at #1 on the Billboard Hot 100, scoring Timbaland his first US No.1. Meanwhile it also scored Timbaland his first UK No.1. It features additional vocals from Nelly Furtado and Justin Timberlake.
"The Way I Are" was released as the second single on July 1, 2007. It peaked at #3 on the Billboard Hot 100 and at #1 on the UK Singles Chart to score Timbaland his second UK No.1. It features additional vocals from Keri Hilson and a rap verse from D.O.E. It is commonly believed that Timbaland sampled Salt-n-Pepa's "Push It" on this song but that harmony was actually performed by Keri Hilson.
"Apologize" was released as the third single on August 12, 2007. It is a remix of OneRepublic's "Apologize" and features the same vocals from the original. It peaked at #2 on the Billboard Hot 100, while it peaked #3 on the UK Singles Chart. On the Billboard Hot 100 Songs of the Decade, "Apologize" came 10th, making it his most successful song ever.
"Scream" was released as the fourth single and final single on December 7, 2007. It failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 but did peak at #12 on the UK Singles Chart. It features additional vocals from Keri Hilson and Nicole Scherzinger.
"Throw It on Me" was originally set to be released as the third single, yet it was instead released as a US Promotional Single on August 5, 2007. It features main vocals from The Hives. It peaked at #96 on the Billboard Hot 100. A music video for the song was released in late 2007.
"Bounce" was released as a promotional single in the US on February 8, 2008, after it was featured in the soundtrack for Step Up 2: The Streets. It features a chorus from Justin Timberlake and features rap verses from Dr. Dre and Missy Elliott. It peaked at #93 on the Billboard Hot 100. The song uses an uncredited sample of the song "Dirty Talk" by Klein + M.B.O.
Two songs from the album were performed on an episode of the ABC soap opera One Life to Live on October 9, 2007. Timbaland performed "The Way I Are" with Keri Hilson, D.O.E., and Sebastian. OneRepublic appeared in the same episode and performed "Apologize".
The Shock Value 2008 Tour was supposed to be Timbaland's concert tour to support his album, Timbaland Presents Shock Value. Dates in Australia and New Zealand were announced. However, the tour was cancelled one day before it was going to begin due to scheduling conflicts in Europe.
