Results May Vary is the fourth studio album by the American nu metal band Limp Bizkit. Released in 2003, it is the band's only release under the leadership of Fred Durst. Results May Vary is the only Limp Bizkit album without guitarist Wes Borland, who left the band in 2001. Limp Bizkit recorded with Snot guitarist Mike Smith after Borland's departure; when the band had a falling-out with Smith, much of the material recorded with him was discarded. Despite negative critical reception, the album peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 and sold more than 325,000 copies in its first week after release.
Originally entitled Bipolar and Panty Sniffer, Results May Vary differs from the band's established sound. The album features a variety of musical styles in addition to nu metal, rap rock and rap metal elements, and a change in Limp Bizkit's lyrical style.
During production, the album's title changed from Bipolar to Panty Sniffer, and then to Results May Vary. Other working titles were Less Is More, Fetus More and The Search For Teddy Swoes. The finished product assembled songs from a number of sessions. On August 20, 2003, Fred Durst posted on the Limp Bizkit website:
Hey there. It’s my birthday and I say fuck it! It’s time to put this damn album out already! I hate waiting! The artwork is cool. I worked on it at home and shot the photography myself with my brother Cory. The album title is Results May Vary. Like a prescription drug, each persons reaction to the ingredients will be different. So with our new album, each individual will have their own reaction and RESULTS MAY VARY! Get it? Of course you do. The album has been prescribed by Dr. Tyler Durden. And it a dosage for Mr/Mrs absolutely everyone. You should listen once daily and it may cause emotional reactions. Results may vary. And so on.
According to The Michigan Daily, "Actually, results don't vary, they all say this album sucks."
In October 2001, Fred Durst posted on the band's website: "Limp Bizkit and Wes Borland have amicably decided to part ways. Both Limp Bizkit and Borland will continue to pursue their respective musical careers. Both wish each other the best of luck in all future endeavors". According to Durst, Limp Bizkit would "comb the world for the illest guitar player known to man" to replace Borland. After holding a nationwide audition for a new guitarist, "Put Your Guitar Where Your Mouth Is", the band recorded with Snot guitarist Mike Smith. "Mike brought in a breath of fresh air", Durst said. "Creatively, it fit like a glove. It made life easier and more positive. It made us look forward to getting together as a band so much more. The positive effect he had on me just made the whole experience of Limp Bizkit feel like a brand-new entity". Before Smith replaced Borland, Durst played a great deal of guitar. Jon Wiederhorn of MTV wrote, "Limp Bizkit jammed with four finalists after their much-publicized guitarist audition tour, but now it looks like Fred Durst might be taking a cue from his Puddle of Mudd pal Wes Scantlin and handling both vocal and guitar duties himself".
After a later falling-out with Smith, Durst told a fansite: "We are the type of people that stay true to our family and our instincts and at any moment will act on intuition as a whole. Mike wasn't the guy. We had fun playing with him but always knew, in the back of our minds, that he wasn't where we needed him to be mentally". Limp Bizkit scrapped many of Smith's sessions, recording another album which was also scrapped.
Before the introduction of Results May Vary's track listing, Page Hamilton of Helmet and Rivers Cuomo of Weezer recorded songs with Limp Bizkit for the album; Al Jourgensen of Ministry also joined the band in the studio. The contributions of all three were omitted from the finished album. Bubba Sparxxx joined Durst in a Los Angeles studio, but his contributions also did not make the album. Durst wrote over 30 songs with Limp Bizkit drummer John Otto and the band's bassist, Sam Rivers. During production of Results May Vary, Durst listened to the Cure, Patsy Cline, Mazzy Star and classical music.
Results May Vary was recorded under the leadership of Fred Durst, who influenced a direction differing from Limp Bizkit's established sound. Although the album features elements of nu metal, rap metal and rap rock, it is noted for music experimenting with other genres: psychedelia, emo, alternative rock, hard rock, jazz, acoustic and funk. Results May Vary, more melodic than previous Limp Bizkit albums, has been compared to John Mayer, Bon Jovi, Primus, Linkin Park Staind and Jane's Addiction (including the album Nothing's Shocking). It has been characterized as alternative rock, nu metal and rap rock. With a change in the band's sound, Results May Vary has less rapping, more singing and more melody (including power ballads) than previous Limp Bizkit albums. The Observer called the album Limp Bizkit's "safest, most pedestrian-sounding record yet", and Joe D'Angelo of MTV described the album as the band's "most personal album by far". According to D'Angelo, "Comparatively mild tunes comprise a third of the album and present the frontman as having actual feelings other than rage, angst and conceit under his omnipresent ball cap. Anger isn't completely absent, mind you — it's just paired with sensitivity, loneliness and warmth". Durst described Results May Vary as "more sad, more deep, drone-y", and the album demonstrates his "milder, more sensitive streak". Although the songs on Results May Vary are emotional and expressive, except for "Eat You Alive", screaming is largely absent. Durst said, "My approach to [confrontation] now is past the screaming part. It's 10 times more dangerous to go past that and know what it is that you're trying to express. That can be therapy, and that's what happened to me in a weird way. That's why there is not so much screaming". Guitarist Wes Borland, who was replaced by Mike Smith of Snot, did not appear on the album.
Durst's controversy with Britney Spears provided lyrical inspiration for Results May Vary, which features a cover of The Who's "Behind Blue Eyes" with a Speak & Spell during the song's bridge. "Gimme the Mic" includes lyrics from the Beastie Boys' "Pass the Mic" and Eric B. & Rakim's "Microphone Fiend", and "Let Me Down" samples Steve Miller's "Take the Money and Run". "Head for the Barricade" borrows from the song "Stick 'Em" by the Fat Boys. "Phenomenon" borrows the line, "Once again back its the incredible", from "Bring the Noise" by Public Enemy. The album demonstrates Limp Bizkit's gloomy side, with more-serious, less-confident lyrics than previous songs. Lyrical topics include bullying, Durst's past, self-pity, betrayal, childhood pain, heartbreak, feeling misunderstood, love and Durst's views on MTV and radio. About "Down Another Day", Joe D'Angelo of MTV said: "It's hard to believe that such John Mayer-esque lyrics come from a man who, only months ago, likened himself to a chainsaw and threatened to skin your ass raw". "Eat You Alive" was reportedly about Britney Spears (rumored to be involved with Durst) or Angelina Jolie (whom Durst admired). "The scream in 'Eat You Alive' is like an animalistic, sexual, crazy, primitive roar", Durst said. "That song is about that feeling, that desire". "Just Drop Dead" was inspired by his experiences with other women; the song, "about a girl who acts like a whore" was not (as had been speculated) about Spears.
To promote Results May Vary, Durst filmed music videos for "Eat You Alive" and "Behind Blue Eyes" featuring Thora Birch and Halle Berry. The video for "Eat You Alive" appeared on MTV before Results May Vary was released, and the album was featured on Total Request Live. Limp Bizkit performed "Crack Addict" and "Rollin'" during WrestleMania XIX with guitarists Mike Smith and Brian Welch, and "Crack Addict" was played on television commercials for the event. Although "Crack Addict" was the planned first single from Results May Vary, the song was omitted from the album.
Results May Vary peaked at number three on the Billboard 200 with sales of over 325,000 copies in its first week after release, ending the group's number-one streak on the chart. Three weeks after release, the album had sold over 500,000 copies. It was certified platinum on June 3, 2008 in the United States and gold on October 10, 2003 in the United Kingdom. Results May Vary had sales of 1,337,356 copies in the United States. The album's cover of "Behind Blue Eyes" peaked at number 71 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 25 on the Mainstream Top 40 charts, and was certified gold by the RIAA on January 26, 2005. "Eat You Alive" peaked at number 16 on the Mainstream Rock and number 20 on the Modern Rock Tracks charts, and "Almost Over" peaked at number 33 on the Mainstream Rock chart. Results May Vary had less mainstream mainstream success than previous Limp Bizkit albums, such as Significant Other and Chocolate Starfish and the Hot Dog Flavored Water, with sales considerably lower than the latter.
Critical reception of Results May Vary was mainly negative. The album received "generally unfavorable reviews" on Metacritic, with a score of 33 out of 100. According to AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine, "The music has no melody, hooks, or energy, [and] all attention is focused on the clown jumping up and down and screaming in front, and long before the record is over, you're left wondering, how the hell did he ever get to put this mess out?" In a later review of the band's Greatest Hitz compilation, Erlewine called "Behind Blue Eyes" the worst in "their never-ending series of embarrassing covers". Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian wrote, "At least Limp Bizkit can't be accused of festering in the rap-rock ghetto ... But Durst's problems are ever-present - and does anybody still care?" In his book, The Essential Rock Discography, Martin Charles Strong gave Results May Vary four out of ten stars; The Rolling Stone Album Guide gave the album three out of five stars. Stylus Magazine criticized Results May Vary, calling it "an album that can only be described as abysmal": "The rest of the album is a confusing sludge of noodly guitar, langorous drumming, and plenty of nasal crooning by Durst. The songs are simply poorly written: song structures change without reason or continuity, creating a mess of musical nonsequiturs without a catchy melody or hook to be found." Luke Winkie of Westword placed the album sixth on his list of "The Eight Worst Albums Ever: Let's Give Them a Second Chance". Dafydd Goff of The Guardian placed Results May Vary on the newspaper's list of "The worst reviewed albums of modern times". Jeremy Allen of Playlouder criticized the album in general and its lyrics in particular. Rob O'Connor of Yahoo! Launch also criticized Results May Vary: "No, Fred, the results don't vary. The results are consistent throughout your new album—consistently crappy." Adam Webb of Dotmusic wrote, "Eventually, 'Results May Vary' could become a fascinating document - a frightening insight into the vacuous state of 21st century culture." Alternative Press called the album "forgettable to anybody with a soul". According to E!, "Sorry, dude, the Results are in--and they're not good." Kitty Empire of The Guardian wrote, "Limp Bizkit have decided to expose their tender side. They really shouldn't have bothered ... having seen Limp Bizkit's 'other side', you want the old, unapologetic, meathead version back". Renee Graham of Boston.com called the album "dreadful". Len Righi of The Morning Call wrote, "The results are in: Along with Limbaugh, Hannity and Savage, Limp Bizkit deserves a spot in the Bellyachers Hall of Fame." Scott Mervis of the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette also criticized Results May Vary: "Limp Bizkit returns with more maturity, more perspective and more ideas. Right? Wrong." According to Mervis, "Results May Vary has a few highlights — "Almost Over" (very Everlast) and "Phenomenon" (very Primus) — but way too few to justify all the time and energy spent."
Although Results May Vary received primarily negative reviews, according to Spin the album "isn't all that horrible". Tom Day of musicOMH wrote, "Ultimately, this album is neither crap nor blindingly good, and results do indeed vary". The Sun-Sentinel gave Results May Vary a positive review: "DJ Lethal does a phenomenal job of mixing effects into the songs, proving once again he's not just for show ... Controversial front man Fred Durst lets his inner feelings spill out in 'Behind Blue Eyes'. The remake of the song by the Who shows an emotional plea for sympathy by Durst. 'Build a Bridge' begins with an acoustic guitar and slowly progresses into a heavier song, similar to songs by Staind. Both tracks prove Durst can do more than just rap." IGN's review of Results May Vary was mixed, criticizing Durst's rapping and some of his lyrics but praising "Down Another Day", "The Only One" and "Let Me Down"; "Build a Bridge" reveals "a more mature side of the boys" and in "Drown", "The lyrics come off as some of Durst's most mature, his plea to be saved before he drowns. It's a fitting closure to a mixed bag of an album, signaling that there is more to Bizkit than cock grabbing rap posturing and nu metal bravado. Could this be the ushering in point of a new, more mature Durst?"
Main personnel
DJ Lethal - Turntables, keyboards, samples, programming, sound development, producer, composer
Fred Durst - Vocals, concept, art direction, cover design, guitar, photography, producer, composer, lyrics
John Otto - Drums, percussion, beats
Sam Rivers - Bass, composer, guitar
Mike Smith - Guitar
Additional personnel
J.D. Andrew - Assistant
Michael "Elvis" Baskette - Engineer, guitar
Billy Bowers - Engineer
Jason Carson - Engineer
Sergio Chavez - Assistant
Jason Dale - Engineer
Terry Date - Engineer, producer
Cory Durst - Photography
Neal Ferrazzani - Assistant
Dave Holdredge - Digital editing, engineer
Brian Humphrey - Assistant
Jun Ishizeki - Assistant
Aaron Lepley - Assistant
Stephen Marcussen - Mastering
Jim Marshall - Photography
John Morrical - Assistant
Brendan O'Brien - Mixing
Zack Odom - Assistant
Michael Patterson - Mixing
Steve Robillard - Assistant
Rick Rubin - Producer
Andrew Scheps - Engineer
Jordan Schur - Executive producer
Snoop Dogg - Vocals on "Red Light-Green Light", composer, lyrics
Jason Spears - Assistant
Mark Valentine - Assistant
Stewart Whitmore - Digital editing
Ulrich Wild - Engineer
Brian Welch - Guitar on "Build a Bridge"
Randy Pereira - Guitar on "Behind Blue Eyes"
Arthur Baker - Composer
Roger Ball - Composer
Eric Barrier - Composer
Molly Duncan - Composer
William Griffin - Composer
Prince Markie Dee - Composer
John Robie - Composer
Pete Townshend - Composer
Ellis Williams - Composer
Album - Billboard (North America)
Songs - Billboard (America)
