Kyle Richard Gass (born July 14, 1960), also known as KG, is an American rock musician, singer-songwriter and actor. He is a member of the comedy rock band Tenacious D, winner of a Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance, alongside longtime friend Jack Black. He also has his own supergroup called The Kyle Gass Band which he formed after the break-up of his other side-project, Trainwreck in 2011. In Tenacious D, Gass plays lead guitar and sings backup vocals, and also plays the role of Black's comic foil in most of their comedy routines. He is the godfather of Black's son.
Kyle Gass was born in Walnut Creek, California, and has a brother, Matt. He attended Las Lomas High School, where he played flute in the marching band.
Gass was featured in several episodes of the television show Fear of a Punk Planet, which has since been released on DVD. He has also made an appearance as a lawyer in the Good Charlotte video for "Lifestyles of the Rich And Famous". Along with Black, Gass made a comedic appearance as a hapless airplane mechanic in the Foo Fighters' 1999 video "Learn to Fly."
Gass acted in the feature film Jacob's Ladder which stars Tim Robbins. Gass made a cameo appearance with Michael Richards in the Seinfeld episode, "The Abstinence". Gass appeared in the comedy Elf as an inept author of children's books. He has played small roles in many of Black's films (Year One, Kung Fu Panda, Shallow Hal, Saving Silverman, The Cable Guy, etc.). Gass appeared in season 9 of Friends as a mugger, as the porn director in the 2008 teen film Extreme Movie, Walrus Boy in Wieners, and as the dirty trucker in the men's room in the 2008 film Sex Drive. He starred in the movie Tenacious D in the Pick of Destiny, alongside Jack Black. Gass had a cameo role as a singing karaoke cowboy in the 2007 movie Wild Hogs. In October 2008, Gass appeared as the character Decatur Doublewide in the film Lower Learning.
He auditioned for a role as a demon in the pilot episode of Reaper, directed by Kevin Smith, but he wasn't hired, to Smith's disappointment. He also appeared in the 22nd episode of 2nd season of 2 Broke Girls as the special effects guy (Also known as 'Cookie Guy').
While appearing on Late Night with Conan O'Brien on November 15, 2006, Gass claimed to have been the youngest graduate of the Juilliard School of Music with a degree in classical guitar studies at the age of 13. It should be pointed out that Juilliard did not have a guitar program in 1973, but began its graduate level guitar program in 1989 under Sharon Isbin, and its undergraduate program in 2007. Earlier, in an article in the Sunday Times on October 29, 2006, Black stated that Gass was the youngest graduate of Juilliard. On May 13, 2008, Gass was a phone in guest on the Adam Carolla Show. When Adam Carolla asked him "... And did you go to Juilliard?" Kyle replied "I didn't. I—you know, I made that up as a joke," he continued, "and I thought it would be hilarious, and then I've been hearing about it ever since. Apologies to Juilliard."
Gass is featured as a minor character in the 2009 video game Brütal Legend (of which Jack Black plays the lead role), in which he portrays Kage the Kannonier, a self-pitying giant in charge of a mortar cannon.
Gass stars in a web show, Guitarings, with John Konesky.
