Trapp Family Story (トラップ一家物語, Torappu Ikka Monogatari) is a Japanese anime series by Nippon Animation.
It was based on the memoir The Story of the Trapp Family Singers by Maria von Trapp, which has also inspired the world famous musical The Sound of Music.
While many things were changed from the original story, unlike other adaptations such as The Sound of Music, the children's names are all correct in this version.
The opening theme differed depending on the broadcasting. The series first used "Doremi no Uta (Doremi Song)" as the intro theme during earlier broadcasting, however, the DVD and video version of the series uses "Hohoemi no Mahou (Smile Magic)" as the new opening song.
"Doremi Song [ドレミのうた] (Do-Re-Mi no Uta)" by Eri Itoh and Children's Choir of the Forest (early broadcasting version) - This was a Japanese adaptation of the song Do-Re-Mi from The Sound of Music.
"Smile Magic [ほほえみの魔法](Hohoemi no Mahou)" by Eri Itoh (video, DVD, and later rebroadcasting version)
"With Outstretched Hands'' [両手を広げて](Ryoute wo hirogete)" by Eri Itoh
My Aspiration to be a Catholic Nun
My Future as a Sister
The Captain and his 7 Children
The 26th Governess
Maria is the Cause of Drama
The Missing children and the Hunger Rebellion
I can not trust Adults
Courtesy is Important!?
Baron Trapp's Fiance?
Sewing Machine and Violin
Playing in Mud is Supreme
Chocolate Cake: Maria Style
Don Quixote's First Love
Music Box's Secret
Martina and the Bear, Nikola
The House without Fraulein Maria
A Wounded Fawn
All God's creature, Great and Small
Lady Yvonne's Gift's
Each Person's Life
Baron von Trapp's Decision
Can You Live Alone?
Letter to the Angel
Christmas Carol
In the Snow of the Alps
Orange and Flower Seedling
Yesterday, Today, and Tomorrow
Mischief Agathe
Person Who Becomes Wife and Mother
Marriage?
Desire and the Summons of God
A Bride in July
True Family
Family chorus birth
The singing voice of the Wind
Nazi's Invasion
New greeting
Hans' secret
Boast and belief
Good-bye to the mother Country
