"Don't Bother" is a song performed by Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira, taken from her seventh studio album and second English-language album, Oral Fixation, Vol. 2. The song was released on October 4, 2005, by Epic Records as the lead single from the album. The song was written by Shakira, Lauren Christy, Graham Edwards and Scott Spock, and was produced by Shakira. "Don't Bother" is a rock-influenced song in which Shakira assures her former lover that she does not need his sympathy and can move on without him.
Upon its release, "Don't Bother" received generally mixed reviews from music critics, who praised Shakira's vocals but felt that the lyrics of the song were strange. Commercially, the track fared well on record charts, entering the top ten in countries including Austria, Germany, Italy, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. In the United States, the song peaked at number 42 on the US Billboard Hot 100, and at number 25 on the Billboard Mainstream Top 40 chart. "Don't Bother" was later certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for digital downloads of 500,000 units. An accompanying music video for the song was directed by Jaume de Laiguana, and features Shakira tormenting her former lover by crushing his car in a wrecking yard. For additional promotion, Shakira performed the song on a number of award and reality shows. It was also included in the setlist of her Oral Fixation Tour.
"Don't Bother" was written by Shakira and American pop music production trio The Matrix, which is composed of Lauren Christy, Graham Edwards, and Scott Spock. Shakira also produced the song. Similar to her seventh studio album Oral Fixation, Vol. 2, (2005), "Don't Bother" musically shifts to a more rock styled composition as compared to Shakira's previous releases. According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony/ATV Music Publishing, the song is published in the key of E minor (Relative key G major is in the chorus) and has a moderate rock tempo of 130 beats per minute. Shakira's vocal range on the song spans from the key of E3 to E5. Through the lyrics of the song, Shakira urges her former lover not to "bother" feeling sorry for her after he chose another woman over her. She promises him that he "won’t ever see me [Shakira] cry" and that she will move on in her life without him. The song contains a spoken bridge in which Shakira lists a number of things she could do to make him stay with her, such as "move(ing) to a communist country", but admits that they would not have an effect on him. Pam Avoledo from Blogcritics found the theme of the song similar to the one in Shakira's 2002 single "Objection (Tango)". Shakira described the song as a feminist anthem, saying:
"I think 'Don't Bother' has a lot of pain in it as a song, but also a lot of humour and sarcasm. Yes, it is a way of exorcising all of these feelings, a form of catharsis, getting rid of all of those emotions that torture us women at some point in our lives"
The song was issued by Epic Records as the lead single from Oral Fixation, Vol 2 and was premiered on October 9, 2005, in the United States by AOL Music's First Listen initiative. The single saw its worldwide physical release on October 4, 2005. The single was made available for digital download on the iTunes Store on October 18, 2005.
The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics. Matt Cibula from PopMatters praised its theme and Shakira's "furious and sexual and self-mocking" vocal delivery, but found the song "strange" and "internally inconsistent". Alexis Petridis from the The Guardian complimented the unpredictable nature of the song, although he also noted that the lyrics at times suggested a "faltering grasp of English". Edward Oculicz from Stylus Magazine gave it a positive review, calling the song's chorus "bruised" and "anthemic" and the lyrics "impossible for native speakers to emulate". Pam Avoledo from Blogcritics was also positive towards the song, noting improvement in Shakira's vocal delivery and calling them "brassy yet sensitive". Spencer D. from IGN Music felt the highlight to the song was Shakira's spoken bridge, saying that it lets the "light tinges of her accent roll of her tongue and present her as herself rather than the obvious result of previous pop matrons". Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic picked the song as a highlight from the album.
In Austria, the song entered the singles chart at number 17 and peaked at number six, spending a total of 24 weeks on the chart. In Finland, the song entered and peaked at number four on the chart, becoming Shakira's highest peaking single in the region since "Whenever, Wherever", (2001). Its stay in the chart, however, was very short and lasted for only a week. "Don't Bother" reached number five on the singles chart in Hungary, and also peaked at number six on the airplay chart. In Italy, the song performed moderately well, entering the chart at number 12 and peaking at number eight; it spent a total of 11 weeks on the chart. In Norway, the song narrowly missed the top five by peaking at number six. In Switzerland, the song entered the chart at number 10 and peaked at number eight; it stayed on the chart for a long period of 31 weeks. In the United Kingdom, the song debuted and peaked at number nine on the singles chart, spending a total of five weeks on the chart. It was Shakira's first single since "Objection (Tango)" (2002), to chart in the country.
In the United States, "Don't Bother" narrowly missed charting inside the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100 chart by peaking at number 42. It spent a total of nine weeks on the chart. On the Mainstream Top 40 chart, it peaked at number 25 and spent a total of 10 weeks on the chart. In the US, the song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of 500,000 units.
The accompanying music video for "Don't Bother" was directed by Jaume de Laiguana, who had previously collaborated with Shakira on the video for "No", and was released on November 15, 2005. The video begins with a man parking his sports car in front of a house and proceeding to enter it. Shakira is seen lying on a bed in the house and the man comes up and lies beside her, indicating that they are a couple. As soon as the man falls asleep, Shakira wakes up and lies atop the man and begins to caress him and bite and whisper in his ear a few times, although he does not wake up. Shakira takes the keys of the man's car and drives it to a wrecking yard. The video then interludes to scenes of Shakira sexually romancing the man in a shower. The scene then changes back to the wrecking yard, where Shakira begins playing a pink guitar. After the spoken bridge of the song, Shakira places her partner's car in a car crusher, which soon commences demolishing it. The man reacts in a similar manner to the car being crushed and begins experiencing continuous body jerks and spasms, indicating a connection between his car and his body. After the car is fully destroyed, Shakira leaves the man unconscious on the bed, exits the house, and begins walking on the street triumphantly. Shakira explained the usage of the car symbolism in the video, saying that "A man's car is like an extension of their ego and their manhood. I thought this would be a video that would make women say, 'Yeah, yeah!' and it would make men feel".
Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine positively reacted to the video and found it "rich with symbolism". Shakira revealed that a nun from a Catholic high school she had attended was angered by the video by saying that "One of the nuns is looking for me after seeing the "Don't Bother" video".
Shakira performed "Don't Bother" live for the first time at the 2005 MTV Europe Music Awards ceremony held on November 3, 2005, where she also won the award for "Best Female Artist". On December 10, 2005, she performed the song along with "La Tortura" on Saturday Night Live. While headlining at the 2007 Live Earth concert held in Hamburg on July 7, 2007, Germany, Shakira performed "Don't Bother" along with three other songs. She performed the song at Rock in Rio held at Madrid, Spain, on July 4, 2008. "Don't Bother" was included in the concert setlist of her Oral Fixation Tour, which was launched to promote the albums Fijación Oral, Vol. 1 and Oral Fixation, Vol. 2.
CD single
"Don't Bother" – 4:17
"No" ft. Gustavo Cerati (Album Version) – 4:45
"Don't Bother" (Jrsnchz Main Mix) – 5:34
"No" ft. Gustavo Cerati (Music video)
Digital download
"Don't Bother" – 4:17
