Scream Aim Fire is the second studio album by Welsh heavy metal band Bullet for My Valentine, released on January 28, 2008 in the United Kingdom and the preceding day in the United State through Jive Records. Since its release, Scream Aim Fire has sold over 1,000,000 copies worldwide, with 500,000 copies being sold in the US alone.
Scream Aim Fire's style is different from the style of Bullet for My Valentine's previous album The Poison; Scream Aim Fire has less screaming than The Poison, but had much more aggressive instrumentation than The Poison. Scream Aim Fire lacks the metalcore elements of The Poison and features a thrash metal style.
Scream Aim Fire went straight to number 5 in the UK album Charts and number 4 in the Australian album charts. Additionally, the album hit No. 4 on the Billboard 200, with first week sales of about 53,000. Since its release, Scream Aim Fire has sold over 1,000,000 copies worldwide and over 500,000 copies in the United States.
The title track of the album is featured in the video game Guitar Hero World Tour. The track "Waking the Demon" is available for download for both Rock Band and Rock Band 2 for the price of $1.99 (160 Microsoft points). "Scream Aim Fire", "Tears Don't Fall", as well as, "Fever" are available on Rockband 3 in a pack for $5.49 for the three or $1.99 Individually. The track "Hearts Burst into Fire" is featured in the video game NHL 09.
Scream Aim Fire is known for featuring the ballad "Say Goodnight". Bullet for My Valentine member Matt Tuck stated that "Say Goodnight" is one of his favorite songs to perform live, even though the song was never released as a single or video. Sometimes when performed live they either play the whole song with the opening solos, or they have Matt Tuck starting the song of by playing the song cleanly on his guitar. After a while, the band appears later with the heavy parts.
Recording of the album was complete in November 2007 with vocalist/guitarist Matthew Tuck telling Kerrang! magazine he was looking forward to be working with guest producer Alec Cartio again.
At midnight on 28 January, Bullet for My Valentine were present in Cardiff to do an album signing to go with the release of the album. At 18:00 the same day, they did a 20-minute performance at HMV in Oxford Circus with 300 present to get their album signed.
A 15-minute album commentary was released on the US digital single for "Scream Aim Fire", released on 18 December 2007, along with the track "Eye of the Storm", which was also released on a free Kerrang! CD and as a free download for signing up to the Sony BMG mailing list.
The second single from the album, "Hearts Burst into Fire", was announced by the band during their UK tour. Matt Tuck said that the band recorded the song live for the music video.
"Waking the Demon" is the third and final single of the album.
All songs written and composed by Bullet for My Valentine. 
5 bonus tracks
No Way Out (Hannu Jordan cover)
Ashes of the Innocent
Hearts Burst into Fire (Acoustic)
Creeping Death (Metallica cover)
Crazy Train (Ozzy Osbourne cover)
"Scream Aim Fire" music video
The Making of "Scream Aim Fire"
Bullet TV:
Welcome to the Studio
Sonic Ranch Cribs
Night at the Ranch
Quad Pinching
Photo Gallery
Scream Aim Fire: The Comics
4 bonus tracks
Road to Nowhere
Watching Us Die Tonight
One Good Reason Why
Ashes of the Innocent
3 music videos:
Scream Aim Fire
Waking the Demon
Hearts Burst into Fire
Bullet TV:
Drinking
Switzerland
Japan
Travel to Oz
Australia/New Zealand
Bullet for My Valentine have also released the album on a metal bullet-shaped Flash Drive with the band's symbol engraved into it. The bullet-shaped Flash Drive has the same properties as the Special Edition CD, with the inclusion of a 15-minute track-by-track video commentary, 4 wallpapers, and the booklet/insert in PDF format.
Bullet for My Valentine
Matthew Tuck – lead vocals, rhythm guitar, guitar solo intro on "Say Goodnight" and "Hearts Burst, into Fire", guitar solo on "Take It Out On Me" , bass guitar
Jason "Jay" James – bass guitar, backing vocals
Michael "Padge" Paget – lead guitar
Michael "Moose" Thomas – drums
Additional musicians
Benji Webbe - additional vocals/lyrics on "Take It Out On Me"
Production
Colin Richardson – producer
Alec Cartio – co-producer
