Jørn Lande (born May 31, 1968), is a Norwegian hard rock and heavy metal singer. He is known for being the former vocalist of bands Ark, Beyond Twilight, Millenium, Vagabond, The Snakes, and most notably of power metal band Masterplan, as well as for his solo career as Jorn.
Jørn Lande has performed with various bands before achieving a solid career.
The first band with whom he achieved a minor success was Vagabond, which also featured Ronni Le Tekrø, Morty Black and other former members of the Norwegian hard rock band TNT. The self titled album, released in 1994, sold 10,000 copies in Norway, but the copies were dropped by label EMI. At this time, Jørn did the lead vocals for the Norwegian national football team's song for the 1994 World Cup, "Alt for Norge" (All for Norway). The second Vagabond album, A Huge fan of Life, was released in Europe on the band's own record label. The end of Vagabond came with the reformation of TNT in 1996, and subsequently the band members went their separate ways, with Jørn joining a band formed in by Whitesnake former guitarists Bernie Marsden and Micky Moody called The Snakes. After a tour with The Snakes playing mostly Whitesnake covers and the recording of an album released only in Japan called Once Bitten, Jørn was fired from the band and joined other projects, including the Symphonic Metal band Mundanus Imperium, which resulted on the album The Spectral Spheres Coronation.
Later on, Jørn got together with guitarist Tore Østby (ex-Conception) and drummer John Macaluso to form the progressive metal band Ark and record their first self titled album in 1999. Right after in 2000, he also made part of the American hard rock band Millenium, led by guitarist Ralph Santolla, and recorded the vocals for their album Hourglass. The same year, John Macaluso from Ark, who was also playing with Yngwie Malmsteen's band, made contact with the guitarist to include Jørn on a mini tour in Europe, as they needed a vocalist for the band. The collaboration between Lande and Malmsteen didn't endure and Jørn left the band in the middle of the tour. Also in the same year, Jørn recorded his first solo album called Starfire, which featured mostly cover songs and several band members from his past and current bands as the musicians of the album.
The second Ark album Burn The Sun was released in 2001 and is one of the most acclaimed works featuring Jørn. Also in 2001, he teamed up with keyboardist Finn Zierler and formed the project Beyond Twilight which led to the album The Devil's Hall of Fame, another acclaimed work by the public and media. Still in the same year, Jørn released his second solo album Worldchanger.
In 2002, Jørn finally joined the global metal scene fronting the melodic power metal band Masterplan, formed in with Roland Grapow and Uli Kusch after both were fired from Helloween. Jørn released two successful albums with Masterplan, playing at big festivals and tours around the world from 2003 to 2006 until he left the band on May 11, 2006, because of creative differences. Jørn wanted to take the band towards a more melodic style, while the other members were leaning towards a heavier sound. During the time as member of Masterplan, Jorn also released two solo albums via the band's record label AFM Records: Out to Every Nation in 2004 and The Duke in 2006. After his departure from Masterplan, Jørn concentrated more on his solo career and started a longtime partnership with the record company Frontiers Records.
In 2005, Jørn teamed up with Symphony X vocalist Russell Allen in a singer-duet collaboration on the album The Battle, and their following album, The Revenge, released May 11, 2007. The project is commonly called Allen-Lande and was put together by the president of Frontiers Records, with songwriting duties and most of the instrumentation done by Swedish guitarist Magnus Karlsson.
Jorn's first live album, Live in America, was released September 21, 2007, containing two discs with tracks taken from his performance on September 16, 2006, at the rock festival ProgPower VII in Atlanta, Georgia.
In 2008, Jørn Lande lent his voice to the rock opera bands Ayreon on the album 01011001 and Avantasia on the album The Scarecrow, both released in January 2008. He was also one of the main guests in the first Avantasia's world tour. Later, he was featured on over 10 songs on Avantasia's two subsequent albums, The Wicked Symphony and Angel of Babylon and once again took part in the world tour in December 2010.
Jørn released two more full-length albums with his own band, Lonely Are The Brave in 2008, which was the fastest selling album of his career, and Spirit Black, right one year after.
On July 25, 2009, Masterplan announced that Jørn was back in the band. Masterplan's 3rd album with Jørn Lande is titled Time to Be King and was released on May 21, 2010.
In late May, a Jorn music video honoring legendary heavy metal singer Ronnie James Dio, who had died of stomach cancer just five days before, was posted on YouTube. Soon after it was announced that Jørn would release a Dio tribute album in July. Later on, it was announced that Jørn was included in the line up of Heaven & Hell, when the remaining members played the one off tribute to Ronnie James Dio at the 2010 High Voltage festival. He was one of the vocalists together with Glenn Hughes.
The third Allen/Lande album titled The Showdown has been announced for release in September 2010. To promote the album, Frontiers Records released a videoclip of the song Judgement Day featuring Jørn singing, via YouTube.
In 2011, Jorn released his second live album with footage from the concert of the 2010 Sweden Rock Festival, the album was called Live in Black. Also in 2011, he was a guest on female singer Amanda Somerville's first metal project Trillium singing on the vocal duet track 'Scream It'.
A new Jorn album called Bring Heavy Rock To The Land was released on June 1, 2012 in Europe and June 5, 2012 in North America via Frontiers Records. It has a single for the title track released in May 14, 2012.
In November 2012, the record company AFM Records announced the production of a new Masterplan album with a new line-up, including Rick Altzi (At Vance) replacing Jørn Lande as vocalist.
Jorn's first release for 2013 is called Symphonic, a compilation of previous recordings with classical music arrangement.
On April 15 of 2013, it was also announced a new Jorn full-length album called Traveller, which was released in June 11 in North America and June 14 in Europe.
Jørn Lande also announced in an interview that a new Allen/Lande album was in the works but this time with songwriting and production made by former Stratovarius guitarist Timo Tolkki, replacing Magnus Karlsson. On 24 July 2013, Timo Tolkki also confirmed the role in the project via his Facebook page. The album was released on October 17 in Europe and October 21, 2014 in North America. This time, Lande has also contributed with some vocal melodies and lyrics to the album.
In 2014, Lande provided lead vocals for songs Lightbringer and Thornmail for the fictional League of Legends band, Pentakill (named after the rare occurrence of one player defeating all five of the enemy team in quick succession) taking the role of Karthus, a lich that serves as one of the playable characters in the game. The first single, Lightbringer, was released on May 27, and the full album, Smite and Ignite, was released on June 3, 2014.
In the same year, it was announced a project created by Lande together with his band's new guitarist Trond Holter (former Wig Wam), an album rock opera based telling the story of Bram Stoker's Dracula. It was released on January 23 in Europe and January 27th 2015 in North America and it's called Swing Of Death. They performed the whole album live on May 1, 2015 at the Karmoygeddon Festival in Norway.
In 2015, Jorn performed live with the fictional League of Legends band Pentakill in São Paulo, Brazil during the CBLOL (League of Legends Brazilian Championship) grand final. He was singing in a duet with the character Karthus (portrayed by Brazilian singer, former Hangar, Nando Fernandes).
The same year, it was announced Jorn's return to the Avantasia crew, recording vocals for the album Ghostlights and taking part in the 2016 world tour.
Jorn was also announced as one of the guests of former Allen/Lande instrumentalist/producer Magnus Karlsson's new album Kingdom of Rock, from his project Free Fall. Jorn sings the first and self-titled track.
In 2016, Jorn announced a new release called Heavy Rock Radio, his third album consisting only of covers songs from artists that inspired him to start a musical career. This time the album would include covers from pop artists such as Kate Bush, Frida, John Farnham and also some rock icons such as Paul Stanley, Queen, Iron Maiden, Journey, Eagles and many more. The album was released on June 3, 2016.
Dracula - Swing of Death (2015)
Vagabond (1994)
A Huge Fan of Life (1995)
The Spectral Spheres Coronation (1998)
Once Bitten (1998)
Live in Europe (1998)
Ark (1999)
Burn the Sun (2001)
Hourglass (2000)
The Best Of... And More (2004)
The Devil's Hall of Fame (2001)
Enlighten Me (single) (2002)
Masterplan (2003)
Back For My Life (EP) (2004)
Aeronautics (2005)
Far From the End of the World (EP) (2010)
Time to Be King (2010)
The Battle (2005)
The Revenge (2007)
The Showdown (2010)
The Great Divide (2014)
Power Supply
Bad Habit (19??) (non-album)
Embee Normann
Wonderland (1993)
Nikolo Kotzev
Nikolo Kotzev's Nostradamus (2001)
Norwegian Gospel Voices
Let's Dance (2002)
Brazen Abbot
Guilty As Sin (2003)
Diesel Dahl & Friends
Happy Birthday Harley Davidson: Tribute To A Legend (2003)
Thunderlords
Fire in the Sky (single) (2005)
Ken Hensley
Blood On The Highway (2007)
Genius - A Rock Opera
Episode 3: The Final Surprise (2007) as Apikor
Avantasia
Lost in Space Part I (2007)
Lost in Space Part II (2007)
The Scarecrow (2008)
The Wicked Symphony (2010)
Angel of Babylon (2010)
The Flying Opera (live album) (2011)
Ghostlights (2016)
Ayreon
01011001 (2008)
Pushking
The World As We Love It (2011)
Amanda Somerville's Trillium
Alloy (2011)
David Lande
Take The Wheel (single) - (2013)
Pentakill - League of Legends
Smite and Ignite (2014) As Karthus
Magnus Karlsson's Free Fall
Kingdom of Rock (2015)
Oceans of Time
Trust (2016)
Trond Holter - Guitars (Traveller, Heavy Rock Radio)
Thomas Bekkevold - Bass (Heavy Rock Radio)
Christian Svendsen - Drums (Live)
Tore Moren - Guitars (Worldchanger, The Duke, Unlocking the Past, The Gathering, Live in America, Lonely Are The Brave, Spirit Black, Dio, Live in Black, Bring Heavy Rock To The Land, guest on Starfire, additional guitars on Heavy Rock Radio)
Jørn Viggo Lofstad - Guitars (Out to Every Nation, The Duke, Unlocking the Past, The Gathering, Live in America, Lonely Are The Brave, additional guitars on Heavy Rock Radio)
Jimmy Iversen - Guitars (Spirit Black, Bring Heavy Rock To The Land, Traveller, additional guitars on Heavy Rock Radio)
Tor Erik Myhre - Guitars (Dio, Live in Black)
Igor Gianola - Guitars (Live, additional guitars on Spirit Black and Dio)
Tore Østby - Guitars (guest on Starfire, Unlocking the Past)
Ralph Santolla - Guitars (guest on Starfire, Unlocking the Past)
Ronni Le Tekrø - Guitars (guest on Starfire, Unlocking the Past)
Jon Berg - Guitars (additional Guitars on Spirit Black)
Nic Angileri - Bass (Dio, Live in Black, Bring Heavy Rock To The Land, additional bass on Spirit Black and Heavy Rock Radio)
Sid Ringsby - Bass (Worldchanger, Lonely Are The Brave, Spirit Black, additional bass on Heavy Rock Radio)
Morty Black - Bass (The Duke, The Gathering, Unlocking the Past)
Bernt Jansen - Bass (Traveller)
Magnus Rosén - Bass (Out to Every Nation)
Steinar Krokmo - Bass (Live in America, guest on Unlocking the Past)
Espen Mjöen - Bass (additional Bass on Lonely Are The Brave, Spirit Black and Traveller)
Willy Bendiksen - Drums (The Duke, Unlocking the Past, The Gathering, Live in America, Lonely Are The Brave, Spirit Black, Dio, Live in Black, Bring Heavy Rock To The Land, Traveller, guest on Starfire, additional drums on Heavy Rock Radio)
Francesco Jovino - Drums (Heavy Rock Radio)
Jon A . Narum - Drums, samples, bass, guitars, melotrone (guest on Starfire)
John Macaluso - Drums (Starfire)
Jan Axel von Blomberg - Drums (Worldchanger)
Stian Kristoffersen - Drums (Out to Every Nation, guest on Live in America)
Dag Stokke - Keyboards (Starfire)
Ronny Tegner - Keyboards (Out to Every Nation)
Alessandro Del Vecchio - Keyboards (Heavy Rock Radio)
Lasse Jensen - keyboards (Heavy Rock Radio)
