Bingo Players (Maarten Hoogstraten) is a Dutch dance and electro house DJ and record producer. Bingo Players was originally a duo including Paul Bäumer (1976-2013). After the death of Bäumer, Hoogstraten announced that Bäumer had said to continue with the Bingo Players. They are best known for their hit songs "Cry (Just a Little)" and "Rattle". Cry (Just a Little) was a Top 40 hit in the Netherlands, Belgium, United Kingdom, and other parts of Europe and Australia, in addition to an international club hit. Bingo Players were ranked number 52 in DJ Mag's Top 100 DJs list for 2013.
The Bingo Players was founded by Dutch DJs, Maarten Hoogstraten and Paul Bäumer, in 2006.
Stylistically, The Bingo Players utilized a choppy form of tech house until 2011, where they would shift into the modern-day EDM scene seen presently. They went on to record their own remixes of several songs over the years. In addition to DJing and producing, Bingo Players own and operate Hysteria Records. The label releases many of The Bingo Players' singles in addition to tracks from up-and-coming electro house producers, including Bassjackers, MAKJ, Sandro Silva, Ralvero and Gregori Klosman.
In May 2011, the Bingo Players released "Cry (Just a Little)", which borrows lyrics from Brenda Russell's "Piano In The Dark". In the same year, the Bingo Players had a hit with their original record "Rattle". The song charted in the Top 40 in the Netherlands, France, Sweden and Denmark.
In 2013 a revamped version of Rattle titled "Get Up (Rattle)" was released and became a number one single in the United Kingdom in addition to being a Top 10 hit in Germany, Austria, France, Australia and other parts of Europe. The single has been certified gold in Canada, silver in the UK, and four times platinum in Australia.
On July 19, 2013, Bäumer announced on the duo's Facebook fan page, that he was diagnosed with cancer and that Hoogstraten would be representing the duo on the road for the remaining tour. Bäumer stated he would still be working in the studio as well as taking lead in running Hysteria Records, meanwhile seeking medical treatment.
On December 17, 2013, Bäumer died after an ongoing cancer battle for over a year. Hoogstraten announced the news on Facebook on December, 18. He had cancelled all upcoming shows to take time off to mourn the loss with his family and friends as well as attending the funeral.
In Early 2014, Bingo Players announced  that Hoogstraten would be continuing on as a solo act, as per Bäumer's wishes. Around the same time, the Bingo Players released "Knock You Out". "Knock You Out" became the group's first number one on the US dance chart  Featuring the lyrics "My fight is won, Who needs a gun, Boom-boom, Knock you out" sang by Kim Viera, who is not credited, it is considered to be a tribute to Bäumer and his struggle with cancer.
The Bingo Players appeared at #96 on the DJmag Top 100 DJ's for 2014.
2006: "Gimme All That You Got"
2006: "Sonic Stomp"
2007: "Shake It"
2007: "Chuck Full of Funk"
2007: "Party People"
2008: "Get Up"
2008: "Bounce (Till Ya)"
2008: "Blurr"
2009: "Disco Electrique" (vs. Chocolate Puma)
2010: "When I Dip"
2010: "Get on the Move"
2010: "Obviously" (with Carl Tricks)
2010: "Lame Brained"
2011: "Sliced" (with Nicky Romero)
2011: "Mode"
2012: "L'Amour"
2012: "Out of My Mind"
2013: "Buzzcut"
2007
UHM – House Ya (Bingo Players Remix)
2008
UHM and Tony Flexx – Our House (Bingo Players Remix)
Josh The Funky 1 – It's The Music (Bingo Players Remix)
Ian Carey – Redlight (Bingo Players Remix)
Erick E – Wanna Go Again (Bingo Players Remix)
Groovenatics – Joy (Bingo Players Remix)
Gio Martinez, Genetik – Pixel (Bingo Players Remix)
Todd Terry – Uncle Tech (Bingo Players Remix)
Soulcatcher featuring Amanda Wilson – Falling For You (Bingo Players Remix)
2009
Ron Carroll – Bump To Dis (Bart B More Vs. Bingo Players Remix)
Oliver Twizt – You're Not Alone (Bingo Players Remix)
Harrison Crump – Gone (Bingo Players Remix)
Kristine W – Feel What You Want (Bingo Players Feel It 2 Remix)
Joachim Garraud – Are U Ready? (Bingo Players Remix)
Villanord – Muzik (Bingo Players Remix)
Ferry Corsten featuring Maria Nayer – We Belong (Bingo Players Remix)
Sander van Doorn and Marco V – What Say? (Bingo Players Remix)
Patric La Funk – Xylo (Bingo Players Remix)
Sir James – Special (Bingo Players Remix)
N.E.R.D – Lapdance (Bingo Players Bootleg Remix)
Nick Supply featuring Tasha Baxter – That Bounce Track (Bingo Players Remix)
Gel Abril – Spells Of Yoruba (Bingo Players Remix)
Martin Solveig – Poptimistic (Bingo Players Remix)
Kid Cudi vs. Crookers – Day 'n' Nite (Bingo Players Remix)
2010
Gramophonedzie – Why Don't You (Bingo Players Remix)
Mastiksoul featuring Zoey – Taking Me Hi (Bingo Players Remix)
Eddie Thoneick featuring Terri B. – Release (Bingo Players Remix)
Kelis – Milkshake (Bingo Players Bootleg)
The Black Eyed Peas – The Time (Dirty Bit) (Bingo Players Bootleg)
David Guetta featuring Kid Cudi – Memories (Bingo Players Remix)
Dany P-Jazz, Fedde Le Grand and Funkerman – New Life (Bingo Players Remix)
Green Velvet – La La Land (Bingo Players Remix)
2011
Sir Mix-a-Lot – Baby Got Back (Bingo Players Bootleg)
Pitbull featuring Ne-Yo, Afrojack and Nayer – Give Me Everything (Bingo Players Remix)
Sander van Doorn – Koko (Bingo Players Remix)
The Prodigy – Everybody In The Place (Bingo Players Bootleg)
Wally López – Welcome Home (Bingo Players Remix)
Manufactured Superstars featuring Scarlett Quinn – Take Me Over (Bingo Players Remix)
Flo Rida – Good Feeling (Bingo Players Remix)
2012
Far East Movement – Jello (Bingo Players Remix)
Carl Tricks – Mad Dash (Bingo Players Edit)
TJR vs. Foreigner - Cold As Oi (Bingo Players Mashup)
Maurizio Gubellini vs. Macklemore - Who's In The Thriftshop (Bingo Players Mashup)
2013
Dada Life – Boing Clash Boom (Bingo Players Remix)
Duck Sauce – Radio Stereo (Bingo Players Remix)
2014
Gorgon City - Here for You (Bingo Players Remix)
2015
Mystery Skulls - Magic (Bingo Players' French Fried Rework)
Hardwell featuring Jason Derulo - Follow Me (Bingo Players Remix)
2016
Bingo Players - "Tom's Diner" (Bingo Players 2016 Re-Work)
Flo Rida – "I Cry" (2012)
Ne-Yo – "Forever Now" (2012)
Alexis Jordan – "Acid Ran" (2013)
List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart
