The End of Heartache is the third studio album by American metalcore band Killswitch Engage. It was released on May 11, 2004 through Roadrunner Records. It is the first album to feature lead vocalist Howard Jones. It is also the first album to feature Adam Dutkiewicz as the lead guitarist rather than the drummer, Justin Foley also from Blood Has Been Shed joined the bands as the drummer also making his first recording on this album.
The new lineup played on the 2003 Ozzfest and the MTV2 Headbangers Ball tour. The first recording was the song "When Darkness Falls" appearing on the soundtrack to the 2003 horror film Freddy vs. Jason. The End of Heartache was released on May 11, 2004. The album debuted in the top 40 of the Australian album charts on May 17, 2004 following a successful tour of that country with Anthrax.
The title track was nominated for Best Metal Performance for the 47th Annual Grammy Awards.
Two music videos for "Rose of Sharyn" and "The End of Heartache" were filmed in promotion of the album. "Rose of Sharyn" had the group performing in a sunny desert with blood dripping from dead branches to form words. "The End of Heartache" featured a darkly lit performance with various computer animated imagery with scenes from Resident Evil: Apocalypse dotted throughout. Both videos saw notable airplay on Headbanger's Ball.
In 2005, a special edition of the album was released which contained 6 additional tracks.
The album was certified Gold by the RIAA on December 7, 2007.
In 2005, The End of Heartache was ranked number 401 in Rock Hard magazine's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time.
All lyrics written by Howard Jones, all music composed by Killswitch Engage.
Killswitch Engage
Howard Jones – lead vocals
Adam Dutkiewicz – lead guitar, backing vocals, producer, engineering
Joel Stroetzel – rhythm guitar
Mike D'Antonio – bass guitar, design, artwork photography, layout
Justin Foley – drums
Guest musician
Jesse Leach – additional vocals ("Take This Oath" and "Irreversal")
Phil Labonte – additional vocals ("Hope Is...")
Andy Sneap – additional guitar ("The End of Heartache")
Production
Chris Fortin – assistant engineer
Wayne Krupa – assistant engineer
Andy Sneap – mixing, mastering
"A Bid Farewell (Live)" is featured on Disc #1 of the compilation MTV2 Headbangers Ball: The Revenge
The original recording of "When Darkness Falls" is featured on the film soundtrack Freddy vs. Jason
"The End of Heartache (Resident Evil Version)" is featured on the film soundtrack Resident Evil: Apocalypse; also as the theme song of professional wrestler Tyler Black
"Rose of Sharyn" is also featured on Disc 1 of the compilation MTV2 Headbangers Ball, Vol. 2
"The End of Heartache" is a playable song in Guitar Hero: Van Halen, Rock Revolution and Rock Band 3 as DLC with an optional Pro Guitar/Bass download.
"The End of Heartache" was featured daily as the closing theme song on "Morency" on Hardcore Sports Radio Sirius Satellite Channel 98 from the summer to late fall of 2009; at which time the show was dropped.
Album
Singles
Mixed and mastered at Backstage Productions, Ripley, Derbyshire, UK, from January 2004 to February 2004.
