Ion Ivanovici (alternatively: Jovan Ivanović, Iosif Ivanovici, Josef Ivanovich) (1845 – 28 September [O.S. 16 September] 1902) was a Romanian military band leader and composer of Banat Serbian origin, best remembered today for his waltz Waves of the Danube.
Ivanovici was born in Timișoara, Austrian Empire. His interest in music began after he learned to play a flute given to him when he was a child. Later, he enrolled in the 6th Army Regiment, where he also learned to play the clarinet. His talent for music soon led him to become among the best musicians in the regiment, and he continued to study with Emil Lehr, one of the most prominent musicians of the latter half of the nineteenth century. Ivanovici later became a bandmaster, and toured Romania. In 1900, he was appointed the Inspector of Military Music, a position that he held until his death next year.
Although today Ivanovici is chiefly remembered for his waltz Waves of the Danube (Donauwellen in German, Flots du Danube, in French), in his lifetime he composed over 350 dances, and his works were published by over sixty publishing houses throughout the world. In 1889, Ivanovici won the coveted march prize to mark the World Exhibition in Paris, out of 116 entries. He died in Bucharest.
His great-grandson Andrei Ivanovitch is a successful international classical pianist.
Souvenir Moskau (Souvenir from Moscow) Waltz
Erzherzog Carl Ludwig March, Op. 129
La Serenade
The Daughter of the Boatman, or Schiffers Tochterlein (La Fille du Marin)
Seufzer Waltz (Sigh Waltz)
Sinaia Waltz
Szerenade Zigeuneren (Gypsy Serenade)
Carmen Sylva Waltz from 1892
Mariana Polka
Romania's Heart Waltz, Op. 51
Incognito Waltz
Abschied von Focsani March (Farewell to Focsani March)
Vision de l'Orient Waltz (Vision of the East), Op. 147
Meteor Waltz
Im Mondenglanz Waltz (Moonglow Waltz), Op. 122
Magic of the Mountains Waltz
Liebes Klange Polka (Love of Music Polka)
Storm Galopp
Wild Flowers Waltz
Abendtraume Polka-Mazurka (Evening Dream Polka-Mazurka)
Agatha Waltz
Der Liebesbote Waltz (Messenger of Love Waltz), Op. 136
Easy, like a Dream, also known as Legere, comme un reve in French and Leicht, wie der Traum in German
Poker Polka, Op. 123
Am Hofe der Czarin Waltz (In the Courts of the Princess Waltz), Op. 124
Die Ballkönigin Waltz (King of the Ball Waltz), Op. 127
Goldene Stunden Waltz (Golden Hours Waltz), Op. 128 from 1893
Céline Polka-Mazurka, Op. 130
Natalia Waltz, Op. 134
Beim Pfanderspiel Polka, Op. 137
Bluthenzauber Waltz, Op. 149
Lieb' um Liebe Waltz (Love for Love Waltz), Op. 155
Alina Waltz
Amalia Waltz
Life in Cyprus
Souvenir de Brăila Quadrille
Aurel Waltz
Cleopatra Waltz
Elena Polka-Mazurka
Farmecul Pelesului
Fata pescarului
Frumoasa romanca Waltz
Frumosii ochi albastri Song
Hora micilor dorobanti
Herzliebchen Waltz
Kalinderu March
La balul curtii Mazurka
Luceafarul Waltz
Military March
Marsul Carol
L'Odalisque Polka-Mazurka
Pe Dunare Mazurka
Placerea balului Mazurka
Porumbeii albi
Die Konigin des Morgens or The Queen of the Morning
Rosina Polka from 1902
Sarba motilor
Suvenire Quadrille
Maus Polka or Mouse Polka
Tatiana Waltz
Roses from the Orient Waltz
Viata la Bucuresti Waltz
Visuri de aur Waltz
Zana Dunarii
Anniversary Waltz
Bavarian Ländler
Kaiserreise or Voyage Imperial March
La Bella Roumaine Waltz from 1901
Danube Waves
