Lee Dong-hae (hangul: 이동해; hanja: 李東海; born October 15, 1986) is a South Korean singer, songwriter and actor. He is a member of the boy band Super Junior, its subgroup Super Junior-M, and Donghae & Eunhyuk, as well as the dance-centered group SM The Performance. He is one of the first four Korean artists to appear on Chinese postage stamps.
Donghae was born in Mokpo, South Jeolla Province, South Korea. His grandmother helped his mother to deliver him. He has an elder brother named Lee Donghwa. When he was young he wanted to become a football player but his dad wanted him to be a singer since he gave up of his dream to become one himself. In 2001, Donghae signed with SM Entertainment after winning a prize at SM's Youth Best Contest. Under SM Entertainment, Donghae was put in singing, dancing, and acting lessons, and was then recruited into a five-member boy band Smile, with future band mate Leeteuk, but the idea was soon dropped. In 2004, Donghae, along with Leeteuk were put into another boy band and formed Super Junior with ten other trainees.
Donghae officially debuted as part of 12-member project group Super Junior 05 on 6 November 2005. He made his acting debut in Super Junior's horror documentary Mystery 6, broadcast in early 2006. The documentary surrounds Donghae and his peculiar ability to see and feel ghosts. In August 2006, Donghae played the role of a human turned cyborg in the Korean version of BoA's music video drama, "Key of Heart".
He played a role in Attack on the Pin-Up Boys. In April 2008, Donghae was put into seven-member sub-group Super Junior-M. Donghae sang the theme song for the 2011 8th Asia Song Festival, "Dreams Come True", with Seohyun of Girls' Generation
In 2011, Donghae co-starred again with fellow member Siwon, in the Taiwanese drama Skip Beat! with Ivy Chen. He also sang the ending theme song, "This is Love," which also featured fellow Super Junior-M member Henry.
On December 16, 2011, Donghae & Eunhyuk began a collaboration and released Oppa, Oppa. The single was also released in Japanese, in April 2012.
In May 2012, Donghae was cast in the title role of Mr. Hedgehog in the romantic comedy Ms Panda and Mr Hedgehog. Donghae also sang his character Go Seung-gi's theme song "Plz Don't", which was released online on 20 August.
In June 2012, Donghae reunited with Super Junior for their sixth studio album, Sexy, Free & Single. In the repackaged edition of the album, re-titled Spy, Donghae co-wrote the lyrics for "Only U" with Leeteuk; and co-composed "Haru" with Urban Zakapa's Kwon Soon-il.
On January 7, 2013, Super Junior-M released their second album, Break Down. In June 2013 Donghae & Eunhyuk released their second Japanese single, and their second Korean single "Still You" on December 18, 2013.
Donghae & Eunhyuk first Japanese album, Ride Me was released on 26 February 2014. "Motorcycle" was the lead single of the album. Super Junior D&E The 1st Japan Tour kicked off in Nagoya on March 4, 2014.
After one year and three months since their second album Break Down, Donghae returned with Super Junior-M to release their third EP album, Swing.
Due to a scheduling conflict, Donghae turned down the casting offer for horror film 'Tunnel'; however, he was later cast as the star lead in the short film The Youth-The Rumor. Donghae was to join the cast of God's Quiz Season 4 as Han Si Woo, a medical researcher. The show aired its first episode on May 18.
On August 2014, it was announced that Donghae and Super Junior would be making their comeback with the group's seventh album, Mamacita which was released online on August 29 and in stores on September 1. In the album, Donghae contributing music and lyrics to their second lead single, 'Shirt,' which received raises from Allkpop, "The track is one of the most energetic on the album beyond the title track."
In February 2015, Donghae & Eunhyuk first Korean album, The Beat Goes On was released on March 9, 2015. The album had seven tracks, including the title song, Growing Pains. Donghae participated in the album production along with producers Team One Sound, The Underdogs, Hitchhiker, NoizeBank and more. On April 1, Donghae & Eunhyuk released first Japanese mini-EP called Present, which contained a total of eight songs including the lead title "Saturday Night". The duo kicked off its concert tour "Super Junior D&E The 2nd Japan Tour" and "Super Junior-D&E Asia Tour" during April to August.
Super Junior special album, Devil was released on 16 July 2015 to celebrate the group's 10th anniversary. Donghae participated in writing lyrics and composing for two songs, "Don't Wake Me Up" and "Alright".
When he was 20 years old, Donghae lost his father to cancer. On 25 June 2006, Super Junior got the SBS Inkigayo Mutizen award, which was their first award. Donghae gave thank you speech to his father who was sick.
On 2 September 2015, SM Entertainment announced that Lee Donghae would enlist as a conscripted policeman on 15 October 2015. On 15 October 2015, Donghae entered through the Nonsan Army Training Center in Chungnam on his birthday.
