Macbeth is an established Italian gothic metal band in the international music scene. Founded in 1995 by drummer Fabrizio Cislaghi.
Formerly known as Land of Dark Souls, the band was inspired by the combination of gothic imagery and music, and the members have been known for contrasting dual female/male vocals. [1]
Macbeth is an established Italian Gothic Metal band in the international music scene. Founded in 1995 by the drummer Fabrizio Cislaghi, the group debuts in 1997 releasing "Nocturnal Embrace", a demo tape in a limited numbered copies.
In 1998, Macbeth signs a recording contract with Dragonheart Records, a division of Audioglobe and the same year they release their first album "Romantic Tragedy 's Crescendo". The album has a good success and rave reviews throughout Europe and is regarded as one of the best symphonic gothic metal albums of the year.
After a promotional tour and a few changes in the line-up, Macbeth enter the studio to record their second work, "Vanitas " which is released in 2001. The album shows a more aggressive approach without losing that trademark melodic side of the band.
However a further leap is made with the publication of "Malae Artes" in 2005. The third album is recorded by a renewed line-up and is licensed in USA, Mexico, Russia and Far East, getting the wider release so far. The promotional tour takes the band from Europe to South America and in the major cities of Mexico. In 2006 Macbeth performs in Beirut, headlining the Rock Nation festival. Singer Morena guests in the musical project Rezophonic along with many artists of the Italian rock scene, and works as host in the Morning Glory and Database programs on Rock TV channel.
In 2007 the band releases "Superangelic Hate Bringers" containing the single “Without You", and the promotional video reaches over 500.000 plays on YouTube. "Superangelic Hate Bringers" is the most direct of Macbeth’s album with a truly great production. The legendary British magazine Classic Rock publishes a rave review in the December of the same year, which raises interest around the band.
In 2008, Macbeth reach England for the first time for a tour and return to Belgium for the sixth edition of the Metal Female Voices Fest. The same year the singer Morena participates as a guest at the March Metal Day Festival in Athens. The song "Do not Pretend" from " Superangelic Hate Bringers " is used by Sky Sports throughout the Formula 1 Grand Prix.
While already at work on new album in 2009, the band was forced to take a long break due to personal problems but the long gestation allows the group to prepare a new album with superior qualities.
Macbeth have set "Neo-Gothic Propaganda" as the title of their fifth full-length studio album. The new sound combines a wide range of influences and is heavier, dynamic and more melodic. "Neo-Gothic Propaganda" is made up of ten brand new melodic and heavy songs and mixes gothic atmospheres into music that doesn't fit into any categories. "Neo-Gothic Propaganda" is a manifesto, is a movement, is the soundtrack of contemporary decadence."
Macbeth's fifth studio album entitled "Neo-Gothic Propaganda " was released on February 24, 2014. "Scent of Winter"is the title of the first single and video of the album.
Romantic Tragedy's Crescendo (1998)
Vanitas (2001)
Malae Artes (2005)
Superangelic Hate Bringers (2007)
Neo-Gothic Propaganda (2014)
Nocturnal Embrace (demo) (1997)
Current members
Morena Rozzi – female vocals
Andreas Cislaghi – male vocals
Fabrizio Cislaghi – drums
Max Montagano – lead guitar
Marco "Sem" Semenza – bass guitar
Previous members
Vittorio (1995–1998) – male vocals
Cristina (1996–1998) – female vocals
Jessica (1999) – female vocals
Alex – lead guitar
Fabio (1996) – bass guitar
Monica (1996) – keyboards
Andrea (1995–2004) – piano/keyboards
Luca Sassi (1995–2005) – rhythm guitar
Carlo (2005) – keyboards
