Norma Sabrina Salerno (born 15 March 1968), also known in her singing career as Sabrina and Sabrina Salerno, is an Italian singer, songwriter, record producer, model, actress, and TV hostess. During her career, she has sold over 20 million records worldwide and scored 10 international hits, including 3 number ones. Internationally, she is best known for her 1987 single "Boys (Summertime Love)", which topped the charts in France and Switzerland, and peaked at number 3 in the UK. The song was accompanied by a provocative music video, which established Sabrina's image as a sex symbol.
After winning a beauty contest in her native region, Liguria, Sabrina started modelling, and in 1984 made her television debut in the Italian prime time show Premiatissima on Canale 5. In 1986, her debut single "Sexy Girl", sung in English, was released. Produced by Claudio Cecchetto, it became a top 20 hit in her native Italy and a modest international success. In late 1987, she released her first album, Sabrina, which was entirely sung in English. In addition to "Sexy Girl", the album included her international breakthrough hit "Boys (Summertime Love)" (number 1 in France and Switzerland, and top 5 in over 10 more countries), and "Hot Girl", a top 20 hit in some European countries. "Boys" gained popularity for its famous video, which included sexually suggestive scenes. The song has sold more than 1.5 million copies to date worldwide and remains Sabrina's trademark hit.
In 1988, Sabrina received the "best European singer" award during the Festivalbar event, and enjoyed another European-wide summer hit with the single "All of Me (Boy Oh Boy)", produced by Stock, Aitken & Waterman. Later in that year, her second studio album, Super Sabrina, was released, and she maintained her image as a European sex symbol thanks to the raunchy videos that accompanied hits such as "My Chico" (her highest-charting single in Italy) and "Like a Yo-Yo", produced by Giorgio Moroder. The latter became the musical theme of Odiens, a very popular Italian prime time TV show, in which Sabrina also appeared. Thanks to the success of her music and sexy image, Sabrina performed in many European countries, among others at the Montreux Jazz Festival in 1988 or at the Olympic Stadium in Moscow in 1989, where over 3 days 50,000 people gathered to see her perform. In 1989, she starred in the Italian movie Fratelli d'Italia, directed by Neri Parenti, along such actors as Christian De Sica, Jerry Calà, and Massimo Boldi. She also released a new single, "Gringo", to a moderate success, and the second remix album called Super Remix.
In 1990, Sabrina was the hostess of the weekly prime time TV show Ricomincio da 2 with Raffaella Carrà on Rai Due, and released a new single called "Yeah Yeah", which only was a modest hit. 1991 marked a turning point in Sabrina's career, when she recorded a duet with Italian singer Jo Squillo, "Siamo donne", her first release in Italian language. They performed the song together at the 1991's Sanremo Music Festival to much acclaim. Sabrina's third studio album, Over the Pop, was released the same year, and for the first time she was allowed to co-write and produce some of the songs. Sabrina's desire for independence and distancing from her sexy image led to a conflict with her management. As a result, the promotion of the album suffered, and both the album and the follow-up single "Shadows of the Night" were commercial failures. A brand new single, "Cover Model", was released in France and Italy, but was unsuccessful in the charts, and Sabrina parted ways with her label and management.
Sabrina released several non-album singles between 1994 and 1995, including the moderately successful "Angel Boy" and the new version of "Boys". In 1996, she established her own recording studio in Treviso with her then-husband Enrico Monti, and released her first Italian language album, Maschio dove sei which showcased her more mature pop rock sound. The album and its two singles, "Fatta e rifatta" and the title track, were surprisingly acclaimed by the critics, but turned out commercial failures due to a lack of promotion and distribution. The album would be re-released the following year as Numeri, featuring the new title song. Sabrina debuted as a theatrical actress in the comedy I cavalieri della Tavola Rotonda, playing the role of Morgan le Fay, and then hosted the game show Il mercante in fiera.
In 1998, Sabrina was cast in a new comedy called Uomini sull'orlo di una crisi di nervi which was also very successful, and subsequently hosted the TV show Cocco di mamma on Rai Uno. In this show she would sing some Italian and international summer hits of the past, what led her to launching a music comeback. In 1999, Sabrina released a new album, A Flower's Broken. Although the music video accompanying the song "I Love You" sparked some interest, both the album and the single were unsuccessful, largely due to the dissolution of her label RTI Music. Sabrina appeared on the British TV show Eurotrash where she performed "I Love You".
2001 saw Sabrina's comeback to theatre with the musical Emozioni, where she starred alongside Vladimir Luxuria. The play received very good reviews from critics and toured Italy for almost three years. In 2002, Sabrina hosted another TV show on Italia 1 called Matricole & Meteore, in which she uncovered the current situations of once-superstars, such as Shannen Doherty, Al Corley, Gary Coleman, and Charlene Tilton. In 2005, she starred in the independent film Colori which premiered at Salerno's Independent Cinema Festival, where she won the Critics' Choice Award for "best actress". In November that year, Sabrina performed at the nostalgia concert Дискотека 80-х in Russia. The following year, she premiered a new song called "I Feel Love (Good Sensation)" on her website.
In 2007, Sabrina toured France and published a cover version of the disco classic "Born to Be Alive" on her MySpace page. In 2008, the singer toured France again, with the nostalgia tour RFM Party 80, organized by the French radio network RFM. She also performed at another 80s revival concert in Poland, which was part of Sopot Festival, together with Kim Wilde, Samantha Fox, Sandra, Thomas Anders (ex-Modern Talking), Limahl, and Shakin' Stevens. In October 2008, Sabrina released a double album, called Erase/Rewind Official Remix, which included new versions of her old hits as well as several new tracks and cover versions.
In 2010, Sabrina and British singer Samantha Fox released a cover version of Blondie's hit "Call Me" as a duet. The single peaked at number 4 in the Italian Dance Singles Sales Chart. During the summer of 2010 she hosted the prime time TV show Mitici 80 on Italia 1. In 2012, Sabrina starred as herself in the French movie Stars 80, directed by Frédéric Forestier and produced by Thomas Langmann, and was on another RFM tour in France. In 2013, Sabrina featured on Neon Neon's song "Shopping (I Like To)", from the group second studio album Praxis Makes Perfect. During the same year, she continued touring in France with the RFM Party and started recording new material. During March and April 2014, Sabrina performed with and mentored a dance group called LECCEzione on Rai 1 prime time TV show La Pista. In June, she released a Rick Nowels-produced single called "Colour Me", written and co-produced by Sabrina herself.
Studio albums
Sabrina (1987)
Super Sabrina (1988)
Over the Pop (1991)
Maschio dove sei (1996)
A Flower's Broken (1999)
Erase/Rewind Official Remix (2008)
