Collision Course is a collaborative rap rock CD/DVD set from American rapper Jay-Z and nu metal band Linkin Park, released on November 30, 2004 by Roc-A-Fella, Machine Shop, Warner Bros. and Def Jam records. Before the album, Jay-Z had released collaborations with The Roots and R. Kelly, and Linkin Park had collaborated with various artists on their remix album Reanimation. The album was inspired by The Grey Album by Danger Mouse, which was a mash-up album between Jay-Z and The Beatles. MTV had originally planned on mashing up only one or two songs, but the project was eventually expanded to a six song EP. The album was mostly produced by Mike Shinoda and Jay-Z, and was recorded between July 16 and July 19.
Upon release, Collision Course reached #1 on the Billboard 200. As of June 2014, it has sold 2 million copies in the United States alone. The album spawned one single, Numb/Encore which eventually won Best Rap/Sung Collaboration at the 2006 Grammy Awards. Worldwide, the album has sold more than 7 million copies, making it the best selling EP worldwide.
Due to its short running time at 19:95, with six tracks in total included on the disc, the release has been identified as an EP. All of the tracks included are mashups combining songs by both artists.
The DVD contains behind-the-scenes new footage of the making of the album, as well as the second take of all of the Collision Course songs at The Roxy Theatre on July 18, 2004. Also included are the five scenes from the concert shown on MTV Ultimate Mash-Ups and a picture gallery.
The first single released from the EP, "Numb/Encore", achieved significant airplay on the charts, and stayed on 6 months after its release. "Points of Authority/99 Problems/One Step Closer" was also released to the radio in the US, but was never featured on the Billboard Charts - the videos for both that track and "Jigga What/Faint" were also seen on Kerrang! TV in the UK. "Izzo/In the End" was also heavily promoted on the official Linkin Park websites.
It is the second EP ever (after Alice in Chains' Jar of Flies in 1994) to top the Billboard 200, going on to sell over 300,000 copies in its first week.
Mike Shinoda revealed in his 2004 Grammy acceptance speech that he would be mashing up with Jay-Z for a record under MTV's Mash Ups show.
The network allowed Jay-Z to choose a group or artist for the mash-up. Jay contacted Shinoda, who began experimenting with mixing the tracks before sending some examples to him. As a result, Jay-Z began working with Shinoda through email. The two decided that instead of combining the existing tracks for the live performance on MTV, they wanted to re-work and re-record parts of the songs to make them fit better. Shinoda explains, "Jay and I realized it's better to re-perform the rap vocals if you're gonna do it to a new beat because the vibe changes and you have to deliver your verse a little differently." Shinoda asked his bandmates to re-record instrumental and vocal tracks as well, and ultimately both parties decided they wanted to release the studio tracks. The entire album was put together within four days.
Sometimes, behind-the-scenes audio can be heard within the album, such as Jay-Z saying "You're wasting your talent, Randy!" before "Big Pimpin'/Papercut", or Shinoda saying "This is fun" before "Izzo/In the End".
Collision Course was the first album of Linkin Park that contained a Parental Advisory sticker, since most of Jay-Z's verses contain profanity (although Shinoda and Chester Bennington are also heard swearing in the album). This album was also made in an edited/censored version. Linkin Park wouldn't use profanities themselves until Minutes to Midnight in 2007. However, the clean version of the album left the words "bitch", "ass", and "hoes" uncensored, which means that "Izzo/In the End" is the same on the clean and explicit versions.
A year after the release of Collision Course, Jay-Z was the executive producer on Mike Shinoda's solo effort Fort Minor's The Rising Tied. Also, the song "High Road" from the same record talks about how some critics negatively received Collision Course.
Critics gave mixed reviews to Collision Course. David Jeffries of AllMusic praised the album, calling it "awesomely fun". K.B. Tindal of HipHopDX also equally praised the album, saying that the project "will open a passageway for artists who want to dare to be different as well as those who want to work hard to maintain that difference." Steve Juon of RapReviews called the album "an experiment which bodes well since for the most part these two artists compliment each other."
Meanwhile, Raymond Fiore of Entertainment Weekly, gave a negative review of the album, saying that the pairing of Linkin Park and Jay-Z "comes off like a sanitized nonevent."
"Links to Bonus Content"
"Photos"
Intro
In the Studio
Jay-Z Arrives
Rehearsal
Sound Check
Dirt Off Your Shoulder/Lying from You (Live)
Big Pimpin'/Papercut (Live)
Jigga What/Faint (Live)
Numb/Encore (Live)
Izzo/In the End (Live)
Points of Authority/99 Problems/One Step Closer (Live)
End Credits
"Special Features":
"MTV Ultimate Mash-Ups"
It's Goin' Down
Dirt Off You Shoulder/Lying from You
Jigga What/Faint
Numb/Encore
Points of Authority/99 Problems/One Step Closer
"Photo Gallery"
"5.1 Surround Sound"
Linkin Park
Chester Bennington – vocals
Rob Bourdon – drums
Brad Delson – lead guitar (on tracks 1, 3, 4 and 6)
Joseph Hahn – turntables, sampling, programming
Dave Farrell – bass
Mike Shinoda – vocals; rhythm guitar (on track 3), keyboard, piano (on track 4)
Jay-Z
Shawn Carter – vocals
Production
Produced and mixed by Mike Shinoda
Arranged by Brad Delson and Mike Shinoda
Engineered by Mike Shinoda, John Ewing and Mark Kiczula
Mastered by Brain "Big Bass" Gardner at Bernie Grundman Mastering
Executive producers: Shawn Carter and Linkin Park
A&R: Tom Whalley
A&R coordination for Warner Bros. Records: Marny Cameron
Marketing director: Peter Standish
A&R coordinator: Michael "Stick" Stefrin
Production coordinator: Ryan DeMarti
Sample clearance: Eric Weissman for Sample Clearance Limited
Executive producers: Rob McDermott and John Meneilly
Creative direction for Warner Bros. Records: Ellen Wakayama
Project art direction: THE FLEM and Mike Shinoda
Cover art direction and design: THE FLEM
Cover and all interior line art illustrations: David Choe
Digipak and booklet art direction and design: Lawrence Azerrad for LAD
Photography: Greg Watermann
Director: Kimo Proudfoot
Producer: Matt Caltabiano
Editor: Kevin McCullough
Live audio engineer: Guy Charbonneau
Live audio mix: Mike Shinoda
Executive producer: Janet Haase
Head of production: Joby Barnhart
Post production supervisor: Jason Cohon
For Sunset Editorial: Nazeli Kodjoian, Sin Halina Sy
Additional footage produced by Lenny Santiago
5.1 mixed of Roxy Performance
DVD post producer: David May
Associate producer: Raena Winscott
Menu design: Sean Donelly
5.1 mix producer: David May
5.1 mix engineer: Ted Hall
Assistant engineer: Bruce Balestier
Audio mix: Mix Magic
Colorist: Dave Hussey
Title graphics: Carlos
Authoring: Cinram
Live performance filmed July 18, 2004 at The Roxy Theatre, West Hollywood, CA
Original concept by Michele Megan Dix and Jesse Ignjatovic
