Rosenrot (German pronunciation: [ʁoːzɛn.ʁoːt] "Rose-Red") is the fifth album by German Neue Deutsche Härte band Rammstein, released on October 28, 2005. As of February 2006, the album has shipped 1 million copies globally.
The album includes six songs artistically omitted from Reise, Reise. The album's first title was Reise, Reise Volume Two, but on August 18, 2005 the album was announced as Rosenrot.
The cover art is nearly identical to the Japanese import of Reise, Reise. The image is a slightly altered photograph of the icebreaker USS Atka, taken on March 13, 1960 at McMurdo Station, Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica.
While Rammstein did not actively promote the album, the band built anticipation through a variety of means. The first single from the album, "Benzin", premiered at the Berliner Wuhlheide and was subsequently released on disc. Rammstein's official website featured one-minute samples from six of the tracks, and had featured a prominent release-date countdown. A brief section of the chorus from "Rosenrot" plays in the background of an e-card containing photographs of the band and basic album information.
All songs written and composed by Rammstein. 
There is a compact cassette available (side A = 1–6; B = 7–11)
The US version features a parental advisory label that is printed on the cover.
On August 18, 2005, it was announced that "Benzin" would be the first video for Rosenrot. The "Benzin" video premiered on German MTV on Friday, September 16, 2005. In the video, all of the members of Rammstein except Flake play the role of reckless firemen driving a massive fire truck destroying things along the way. Flake does not appear until the end of the video as a man about to commit suicide by jumping off the roof of a tall building. The other band members open a life net for him but it ends up ripping. The video was shot in Berlin over three days in August 2005. It was directed by Uwe Flade.
The second video from the album, "Rosenrot", premiered on November 30, 2005 on MTV Germany.
The third video, "Mann gegen Mann", was released on February 1, 2006. It shows the band (genuinely) naked and utilizing their respective instruments to cover themselves, with the exception of Till, who is wearing a latex diaper, and sporting an inverted mohawk haircut. The video switches between the band playing, and teeming masses of naked male bodybuilders. Towards the end, Till transforms into the demon that is portrayed on the cover of the single.
The limited edition includes the normal CD plus a DVD with three live performances:
Reise, Reise (Arena of Nîmes, Nîmes / France July 2005)
Mein Teil (Club Citta, Kanagawa / Japan June 2005)
Sonne (Brixton Academy, London / UK February 2005)
All bonus performances were later featured on the DVD Völkerball.
The Limited Edition featured slightly altered artwork, namely "Limited Edition" printed in white on the top left corner, and the band and album name is reflective.
The US Version is the Special Edition, with that printed on the top left corner and the parental advisory logo below, alongside the reflective band and album name.
The Japanese Version, released in 2009, has a SHMCD and the DVD.
Rammstein
Till Lindemann – vocals
Christoph Schneider – drums
Christian Lorenz – keyboards
Oliver Riedel – bass guitar
Richard Z. Kruspe – lead guitar, backing vocals
Paul Landers – rhythm guitar, backing vocals
Additional musicians
Sharleen Spiteri – vocals (track 6)
Bobo – backing vocals (track 6)
Christo Hermanndos – trumpet (track 9)
Carmen Zapata – vocals (track 9)
Olsen Involtini – string arrangement (track 8)
Sven Helbig – trumpet arrangement (track 9)
Matthias Wilke – choir conductor (tracks 1, 2 & 4)
Production
Produced by Jacob Hellner
