Die Schuldigkeit des ersten Gebots (complete title in historical spelling: Die Schuldigkeit Des ersten und fürnehmsten Gebottes; English: The Obligation of the First and Foremost Commandment), K. 35, is a sacred musical play (geistliches Singspiel) composed by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart in 1767 when he was 11 years old. It is Mozart's first opera or, more specifically, sacred drama, as is suggested by the name. The libretto is now attributed to Ignaz Anton von Weiser, although Johann Adam Wieland or Jakob Anton Marianus Wimmer had been suggested earlier. (The title page of the libretto ascribes it only to "J.A.W.".) Only the first part of the opera was composed by Mozart; the second and third parts were contributed by Michael Haydn and Anton Cajetan Adlgasser respectively. However, these other two parts have not survived. Part I of the opera was first performed on March 12, 1767 in the Knight's Hall of the Palace of the Archbishop, Salzburg. Part II was performed on March 19, and Part III on March 26.
Mozart composed the work at age 11 with the help of his two teachers, Michael Haydn and Anton Cajetan Adlgasser. In Salzburg, dividing up a sacred singspiel between other composers was common. The libretto was written by Ignaz Anton von Weiser even though it was said that Johann Adam Wieland suggested the idea first and his name is written on the libretto. Mozart composed only the first part of the opera, and the others composed "part two" and "part three." However, these other two parts have not survived. The performances were predominantly in Salzburg in St. Peter's, in Cathedrals, on the Nonnberg, and in Residenz. The opera includes many recitatives for all of the characters, and each character sings one to three arias. The main characters of the opera are the two tenors; Christgeist and Weltgeist, and the two sopranos; Barmherzigkeit and Gerechtigkeit. The opera does not have a chorus.
Part I of the opera was first performed on March 12, 1767 in the Knight's Hall of the Palace of the Archbishop, Salzburg. Part II was performed on March 19, and Part III on March 26.
Sinfonia Allegro
Recitativo: Die Löblich' und gerechte Bitte
No. 1 Aria: Mit Jammer muß ich schauen
Recitativo: So viele Seelen Fall
No. 2: Ein ergrimmter Löwe brüllet
Recitativo: Was glaubst du
No. 3: Erwache, fauler Knecht
Recitativo: Er reget sich
Recitativo: Wie, wer erwecket mich?
No. 4:Hat der Schöpfer dieses Leben
Recitativo: Daß Träume Träume sind
No. 5: Jener Donnerworte Kraft
Recitativo: Ist dieses, o so zweifle nimmermehr
No. 6: Schilder einen Philosophen
Recitativo: Wen hör' ich nun hier
No. 7: Manches Übel
Recitativo: Er halt mich einem Kranken gleich
Recitativo: Hast du nuunmehr erfarhen
No. 8 Terzetto: Laßt mir eurer Gnade Schein
Oratorio
List of operas by Mozart
Classical music written in collaboration
