Born of Osiris is an American deathcore band, formed in 2003 in Palatine, a suburb of Chicago. The group underwent several name changes, including Diminished (2003–2004), Your Heart Engraved (2004–2006), and Rosecrance (2006–2007), before finally settling on Born of Osiris in 2007, basing the name on the Egyptian deity Osiris, and the tale of his son Horus.
In the early years the band was part of the Northland Chicago metalcore scene along with other (now successfully signed) bands such as Veil of Maya, Monsters, Oceano, and For All I Am.
The group is signed to Sumerian Records and has released three full lengths and two EPs on the label. Their album, A Higher Place, reached number 73 on the Billboard 200. Their second full-length album, The Discovery, released March 22, 2011, debuted at 87 on the Billboard 200.
Born of Osiris has played at various festivals including the Summer Slaughter Tour (2008, 2009 and 2015) and the Music as a Weapon Tour 4. In 2009, they played on a co-headline tour named The Night of the Living Shred Tour with All Shall Perish, After the Burial, Caliban and Suffokate; Born of Osiris also supported Hatebreed on the Decimation of the Nation Tour 2, alongside Cannibal Corpse, Unearth and Hate Eternal. In December 2009, they asked Jason Richardson of All Shall Perish to join Born of Osiris. This began a two-year period of member stability which resulted in the writing and release of The Discovery.
September 2011, members Cameron Losch, Joe Buras, and Lee McKinney recorded and mixed the self-titled first release by Virginia band Mind's I
On December 21, 2011, Born of Osiris fired guitarist Jason Richardson without prior notice. The official press release came three weeks later. Richardson immediately joined Salt Lake City deathcore act Chelsea Grin following his departure from the band. In response to the official statement released by the band, he wrote a scathing status update on his personal Facebook page, stating that the other band members frequently abused alcohol and prescription drugs. Richardson served as a touring member within Chelsea Grin prior to him being kicked from Born of Osiris.
A video was posted showing guitarist Lee Mckinney rehearsing over a riff, which is believed to be part of a song which will feature on the next Born of Osiris release. He also had an eight string guitar built for him by the UK based company Invictus Guitars, suggesting another direction that the next release will take.
Following this, McKinney started a side project called Mechanize (originally named Mecha but the name had to be changed for legal reasons), in which he produces original electronic music and remixes other artists. David Darocha has also started his own jewelry line called D A V I. Cameron Losch, Lee McKinney and former guitarist Jason Richardson are all instructors on the music teaching website Bandhappy, which is owned by Matt Halpern, the drummer of Born of Osiris's labelmate Periphery.
On June 25, 2013, the Sumerian Records YouTube page uploaded a new Born of Osiris song entitled "M∆chine" as well as a new album titled Tomorrow We Die ∆live, which was released August 20, 2013. They toured across North America on the 2013 Rockstar Mayhem Festival. Born of Osiris also supported Asking Alexandria on their Breakdown the Walls Tour alongside August Burns Red, Crown the Empire and We Came as Romans. The band also played on the Monster Energy Stage for the 2014 Vans Warped Tour and they did a headliner in October of 2014 to support Tomorrow We Die ∆live. Within the Ruins, ERRA, Betraying the Martyrs and Thy Art is Murder all supported the band. The band also opened up for The Devil Wears Prada with The Word Alive and Secrets joining as support in the Spring of 2015. The Summer of 2015 saw the band open up for Arch Enemy on the 2015 annual Summer Slaughter tour. In September of 2015 the band went to Russia to support Emmure on a small tour.
The new album, Soul Sphere was released on October 23rd, 2015. In Feburary 2016, The band was the headliner for the Sumerian Records Ten Year Tour. Veil of Maya, After the Burial, ERRA and Bad Omens joined them on the lineup. A second leg of the tour started in May with Upon a Burning Body being added to the lineup, replacing Veil of Maya. The band will play in Europe this September with Veil of Maya as a co-headliner with Volumes and Black Crown Initiate joining as support.
Born Of Osiris's musical style has been described as deathcore, technical death metal and progressive metal.The band cites Meshuggah, Cannibal Corpse, Converge, Hatebreed, Slayer, and The Mars Volta as influences.
Studio albums
EPs
The New Reign (2007)
Demos
Your Heart Engraved These Messages (2003) (recorded while known as Diminished)
Youm Wara Youm (2004) (recorded while known as Your Heart Engraved)
Rosecrance (2006) (recorded while known as Rosecrance)
Narnia (2007) (single song demo which eventually became "The Takeover" featured on the band's The New Reign EP)
Music videos
