Alcest is a French shoegazing band from Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France, founded and led by Neige (Stéphane Paut). It began in 2000 as a black metal solo project by Neige, soon a trio, but following the release of their first demo in 2001, band members Aegnor and Argoth left the band, leaving Neige as the sole member.
This marked a change in style, as Alcest's subsequent releases have more often been described as shoegazing mixing numerous rock and metal influences, including black metal and post-metal. In 2009 drummer Winterhalter from Les Discrets (and formerly Peste Noire) joined Alcest's studio line-up, after eight years with Neige as the sole full-time member. Since its creation, Alcest has released four studio albums.
Alcest was formed as a solo project by Neige in 2000. Soon after, the band became a three-piece black metal outfit, consisting of Neige on vocals, rhythm/acoustic guitar, and drums, Argoth on bass, and Aegnor (now known as La sale Famine de Valfunde. Famine used Neige as a drummer and rhythm guitarist in the early years of Peste Noire and Neige even wrote a song, "La Césarienne", for Peste Noire ) on lead guitar.
In 2001, the band released a 4-track demo tape entitled Tristesse Hivernale on Drakkar Productions in which Famine wrote the main riff of the song "La Forêt de Cristal". Not long after the demo was released, the band once again became a one-man entity, with Neige taking Alcest in a more personal direction. Neige, having originally formed Alcest as an outlet to create cold and raw black metal, moved away from the minimalist approach with the follow-up to Tristesse Hivernale, entitled Le Secret. This EP, released in May 2005, is an introduction of sorts to the new concept behind the reformed Alcest. After having signed to Prophecy Productions in March 2007, Alcest's debut album Souvenirs d'un autre monde was released in early August of the same year, and drew comparisons with the likes of My Bloody Valentine and Jesu. In August 2007, Tristesse Hivernale was released by Northern Silence Productions in August 2007 as a split with French black metal band Angmar.
Alcest's second album, Écailles de Lune (Scales of the Moon), was released March 29, 2010. The band's third album, Les Voyages de l'Âme, was released on January 6, 2012.
Alcest's fourth effort entitled Shelter was released on January 17, 2014 via Prophecy Productions. It features Birgir Jón Birgisson as producer, Amiina for the string sections and a guest appearance by Neil Halstead.
On January 15, 2016, Neige published "New album. Recording started." on the band's Facebook page. He also commented the album would be "definitively darker." On May 16, he stated that the album was in the mastering process.
As a child, Neige had experiences of being in contact with a "far off country", which he generically refers to as "Fairy Land". Alcest serves as the musical adaptation of the memories from this "otherworld". Neige intends for Alcest to be a journey for the listener to this world through his memories. This change in concept was first introduced on Le Secret. Souvenirs d'un autre monde will serve as a literal summation of the concept behind the band.
Some early reviews of Le Secret regarded it as a cold and melancholic black metal release, much to Neige's surprise and disappointment. In an interview conducted by Aeternitas Tenebrarum Music Foundation webzine, he responded to these interpretations, as well as the mention of his vocals creating a "sinister mood":
A sinister mood???.... That really bothers me that you should say that because that proves that I did not succeed in communicating what I had inside me... I just wanted to create a maternal chant, hypnotic and unreal, similar as to what I have heard in the fairy land; certainly not a "dark" chant. My melodies are strange but not stressful, at least I hope not! The lousy production and strangled chant can maybe explain things. If you could have understood my texts, I don't think you would have said that because they are not texts on sadness or anxiety, I keep that for Mortifera. I plan to re-record "Le secret" soon and include two tracks in one album, I hope that this time there will be no compromise as you are not the first person to feel my music as dark music. – Neige
Another misconception is the inclusion of female vocals on Le Secret; all vocals on this EP were performed by Neige. Souvenirs d'un Autre Monde, however, included guest female vocals by Audrey Sylvain from Amesoeurs on the track Sur l'autre rive je t'attendrai.
Studio albums
Souvenirs d'un autre monde (2007)
Écailles de Lune (2010)
Les Voyages de l'Âme (2012)
Shelter (2014)
EPs
Le Secret (2005, re-recorded version in 2011)
Split albums
Aux Funérailles du Monde.../Tristesse Hivernale with Angmar (2007)
Alcest / Les Discrets with Les Discrets (2009)
Live album
BBC Live Session (2012)
Single
Autre Temps (2012)
Demo
Tristesse Hivernale (2001)
