Richard Fortus (born November 17, 1966) is an American guitarist. He is best known as a member of the hard rock band Guns N' Roses, with whom he has been a member since 2001, and with whom he has recorded one studio album. Fortus has also collaborated extensively with The Psychedelic Furs frontman Richard Butler and fellow Guns N' Roses bandmate Frank Ferrer.
Alongside his work in Guns N' Roses, Fortus is a former member of Love Spit Love, Thin Lizzy and the Dead Daisies.
Fortus was born in St. Louis, Missouri. He began learning violin at 4 years old and the drums a year later.
Fortus studied at the Conservatory of the Arts in St. Louis and Southern Illinois University and also played in several youth symphonies in the St. Louis area.
Fortus founded the band The Eyes in 1984. The four-piece alternative band independently released "Freedom in a Cage", which was produced by David Probst. After signing with Atlantic Records, they changed their name to Pale Divine. They subsequently toured the U.S. in support of their only album, Straight to Goodbye, opening for The Psychedelic Furs.
After the Psychedelic Furs split up, Fortus formed Love Spit Love with Richard and Frank Ferrer in 1992. When the Furs reformed in 2000, Fortus joined the group as second guitarist and played on the live album Beautiful Chaos: Greatest Hits Live. Love Spit Love went on an indefinite hiatus soon after.
In 2001, Fortus became a member of Guns N' Roses, replacing Paul Tobias. In Guns N' Roses, Richard plays both rhythm and occasional lead guitar. Lead singer Axl Rose is very pleased with Richard's work and has said, "He's an amazing lead player and very technically skilled. He really likes the pocket that Brain sets and the two of them click with Tommy so we finally have the real deal rhythm section, as Richard is a proven professional. Basically, Richard's the guy that we always were looking for." Fortus recorded guitars for the band's 2008 album Chinese Democracy.
Fortus played with the band as part of the 2016 Not in This Lifetime... Tour, playing alongside classic era members Slash and Duff McKagan.
In 2013, Fortus joined the Dead Daisies with the likes of Jon Stevens and Dave Lowy as well as Guns N' Roses bandmates Frank Ferrer and Dizzy Reed. Their eponymous debut album was released on August 9, 2013. A second album "Revolucion" was released in 2015. Fortus left the Dead Daisies in 2016 to focus on Guns N' Roses.
Fortus was in a group called Honky Toast with Frank Ferrer, singer Eric J. Toast and bassist E.Z. Bake. The group released one album, 1999's Watcha Gonna Do Honky?.
Fortus has collaborated with techno-rock musician BT on several occasions, including touring with him in 2000.
In March 2008 Fortus was one of the guest guitarists for the reunion shows of X Japan at the Tokyo Dome.
In 2008 he joined the Danish rock/pop band, the Storm, on their tour. Fortus played guitar on their first record, "Where the Storm Meets the Ground," and is a personal friend of leadsinger Pernille Rosendahl and lead guitarist Johan Wohlert.
Fortus provided guitar for former The Replacements and Guns N' Roses bassist Tommy Stinson's two solo albums. Fortus also recorded a cover of the James Bond theme for Guitar Hero World Tour and later played the song live as a solo spot during Guns N' Roses's 2012 tour.
He has collaborated with singer-songwriter Lásse Kvernmo in a project called Sáivu. Fortus has also recorded or toured with acts such as Rihanna, N*SYNC, Nena and Ben Folds, among others.
Fortus is a member (alongside Ferrer) of New York-based band The Compulsions.
Fortus briefly joined Thin Lizzy as lead guitarist in 2011.
Guitars: Gibson '73 Les Paul Signature Effects: Hiwatt tape echo, Lexicon PCM80 Pedals: Klon Centaur, Hermida Mosferatu Amps: 2 channel Cornford, '73 Jose-modded Marshall 100, Plexi Marshalls (modified), Diezel
On November 5, 2005, Richard's wife, Jen Fortus, gave birth to a daughter, Paisley Piper Fortus. She gave birth to a second child, Clover Blue Fortus, on January 6th, 2008.
In September 2015, Fortus was seriously injured in a motorcycle crash, causing him to miss dates with the Dead Daisies. Fortus suffered a broken shoulder blade, a broken collar bone, six broken ribs, a broken toe, a bruised lung, a lacerated liver and a concussion.
with The Eyes/ Pale Divine
Freedom in a Cage (1990)
Straight to Goodbye (1991)
With Love Spit Love
Love Spit Love (1994)
Trysome Eatone (1997)
With Tommy Stinson
Village Gorilla Head (2004)
One Man Mutiny (2011)
With Guns N' Roses:
Chinese Democracy (2008)
Appetite for Democracy 3D (2014)
With The Dead Daisies:
The Dead Daisies (2013)
Revolución (2015)
With The Compulsions:
Dirty Fun (2015)
