"Don't You Worry Child" is the sixth and final single released by Swedish electronic music group Swedish House Mafia. It is the last single from their second and final studio album Until Now, featuring vocals from Swedish singer John Martin. In the United States, it is the act's second number-one single on Billboard's Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart, following "Save the World". It received a Grammy nomination for Best Dance Recording in the 2013 Grammy Awards, as did its predecessor, "Save the World", the previous year. The song is written in the key of B minor.
The song was announced during the Swedish House Mafia's tour of Australia while they played at Future Music Festival 2012. They say it was made from the inspiration they took from the beauty of Australia. The title "Don't You Worry Child" was mentioned a few times, with hints from the group members themselves on their Twitter pages. When it was announced that the tour the Swedish House Mafia was about to set on would be their last, a farewell single was also announced – "Don't You Worry Child" being that single. The song had its live debut at the Swedish House Mafia's Milton Keynes Bowl concert and its radio debut on Pete Tong's BBC Radio 1 show on 10 August 2012. The song contains a sample from the song "Be My World" by Italian dance act Milky.
The song was included on their tour One Last Tour, which ended in Miami where they parted ways forever.
In the United Kingdom, "Don't You Worry Child" made its debut at number one with first week sales of 135,000 copies. It sold 632,000 copies in the United Kingdom in 2012, the 13th best-selling single of that year.
In the United States, the song became Swedish House Mafia's biggest hit, peaking at number 6 on the Billboard Hot 100, making it their first and only top ten single. The song has sold over 3 million copies in the United States as of March 2014, and over 5.5 million copies worldwide.
A music video for the song was released on 14 September 2012, filmed on location at the group's final British performance on 14 July 2012 at the National Bowl in Milton Keynes. As of July 2016, the music video has over 373 million views on YouTube.
The pop a cappella group Pentatonix performed a mash-up of the song with "Save the World", also by Swedish House Mafia, on their YouTube channel in February 2013.
In March 2013, British singer Olly Murs did a cover of the song for BBC Radio 1's Live Lounge.
The Dutch symphonic metal band Within Temptation also made a cover of the song for their cover album, The Q-Music Sessions, in 2013.
The Belgian Flemish boyband 3M8S released a cover that charted on the Belgian Ultratop Singles Chart.
The Piano Guys performed a Hindi version of the song ("Khushnuma"), with lyrics sung by Shweta Subram.
TG Lurgan in Ireland recorded a version of the song in the Irish language called Ná Bí Buartha.
Anthem Lights included a version on their album "Covers" in 2013.
The X Factor Australia series five contestant Joelle Hadjia sang this song during her audition.
Kingsland Road sang this song as their room audition for The X Factor UK 2013.
The act "Sons of Serendip" performed their arrangement of the song on America's Got Talent live on 26 August 2014. Their arrangement is also included in their self titled debut album.
Lebanese musician Hadi Sarieddine released an ambient / mellow cover of this song on his official YouTube channel in April 2015.
British recording artist Rick Astley, best known for his hit single "Never Gonna Give You Up," performed this song during several of his live shows.
Postmodern Jukebox recorded and released a cover of this song
The track has been used during various television programmes around the world. It was featured as one of the opening tracks during the Grand Final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2016 in Stockholm, Sweden. It was performed by a group of children in the British soap opera Emmerdale at the funeral of the character Gemma Andrews. The song is playable in the video games Just Dance 2014 and Just Dance 2015.
List of number-one dance singles of 2012 (U.S.)
