Amaral are a music group from Zaragoza, Spain who have sold more than four million albums worldwide. The band consists of Eva Amaral (vocalist) and Juan Aguirre (guitarist), who write their songs together. Eva Amaral started out as a drummer in another group until she set out with Aguirre to perform her own material in 1997. They then moved to Madrid and signed a major deal with EMI. Amaral's musical style is often called pop rock, but it is often fused with Latin beats, folk rock, synthesizers, complex poetic lyrics and in particular, traditional Spanish folk music. Juan Aguirre was born in San Sebastián (also known as Donostia) in the Guipúzcoa province of Spain. He spent his childhood in the town of Gros and currently resides in Zaragoza, while Eva originates from Zaragoza. Amaral have won numerous awards including the MTV Europe Music Award for their 2002 album Estrella de mar which was nominated for 5 other categories, and are one of the best-selling Spanish groups of all time. As of 2011, they have released six studio albums, one (double) live album and two live DVDs.
Amaral has collaborated with many well-known artists in the music industry:
Tony Beard (Mike Oldfield, Mick Jagger), on drums
Peter Buck, on the song Doce palabras, from the album Gato Negro Dragón Rojo
Chetes, on the song Si Tú No Vuelves, from the album Pajaros en la Cabeza
Danny Cummings (Mark Knopfler, Bryan Adams), on percussion
Melvin Duffyel (Robbie Williams, Sting), on pedal steel guitar
Echo String Quartet, on strings.
Antonio Escobar, programming on the album Hacia lo salvaje
Russell Milton (The Waterboys), on bass
Moby, on the single Escapar ("Slipping Away")
Danny Shogger (George Michael, Paul McCartney), on keyboards
Studio albums:
1998 Amaral
2000 Una pequeña parte del mundo
2002 Estrella de mar
2005 Pájaros en la cabeza
2008 Gato negro dragón rojo (double album)
2011 Hacia lo salvaje
2015 Nocturnal
Live albums:
2009 La barrera del sonido
Special editions:
2006 Caja Especial Navidad
EPs:
2009 Granada (EP)
DVDs & Blu-rays:
2005 El comienzo del big bang: Gira 2005
2009 La barrera del sonido
