"Give In to Me" is the tenth track on Michael Jackson's 1991 studio album Dangerous. The single peaked at number one in New Zealand for four consecutive weeks, and at number two on the UK Singles Chart. Stylistically, "Give In to Me" is a hard rock ballad which featured Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash. Some suggest that the song, also considered a heavy metal ballad, has an aggressive sexual flavor. The single was never released in North America or Asia. The single release is notable for its B-sides, which include the album versions of two of Jackson's other hard rock songs, "Dirty Diana" and "Beat It", which also include guest appearances by hard rock guitarists (Steve Stevens and Eddie Van Halen, respectively).
This song is written in the key of E minor. Jackson's vocal spans from G3 to B4. It has a moderately slow tempo of 87 beats per minute.
"Give In to Me" received positive reviews from contemporary music critics. EW editor David Browne praised Jackson's delivery, writing, "when his voice isn't competing with drum machines, it's menacing on the creepy Give In to Me (his best-ever shot at hard rock)." Alan Light of Rolling Stone reviewed the song: "Give In to Me" flirts with something more disturbing as Jackson sings, "Don't try to understand me/Just simply do the things I say" in a grittier, throaty voice while Slash's guitar whips and soars behind him."
The music video for "Give In to Me" features Jackson performing the song on stage at an indoor rock concert with ex Living Color bassist Muzz Skillings, Guns N' Roses guitarists Slash and Gilby Clarke, as well as the band's touring keyboardist Teddy Andreadis. Loud explosions are later heard with visuals of stylized electrical arcs and Jackson dancing as they run down his body. Slash's Les Paul is hit in the frets which increases the speed of the riffs. The last scene shows one electrical arc running down Jackson's body, an unintentional effect that was left in. The video is featured on the video albums: Dangerous - The Short Films and Michael Jackson's Vision.
It was shot on june 25, 1992 in Munich/Germany, just two days befor the opening concert of the Dangerous World Tour on june 27, 1992. The pyrotechnics appearing on the video are computer-generated and were added later on.
Austria CD Single
"Give In to Me" – 5:28
"Dirty Diana" – 4:52
"Beat It" – 4:17
UK CD Single
"Give In to Me" (Vocal Version) – 4:42
"Dirty Diana" – 4:52
"Beat It" – 4:17
UK Promo CD
"Give In to Me" (Vocal Version) – 4:42
"Give In to Me" (Instrumental) – 5:28
45 RPM and 7":
"Give In To Me" – 5:28
"Dirty Diana" – 4:52
Written, composed, and produced by Michael Jackson and Bill Bottrell
Recorded, mixed, bass, drums, mellotron, and guitar by Bill Bottrell
Guitars recorded by Jim Mitchell; assisted by Craig Brock
Special guitar performance by Slash
Solo and background vocals by Michael Jackson
Guitar by Tim Pierce
2000, 3 Doors Down's "Kryptonite" contains a guitar-melody similar to this song.
2001, Eminem's melody line from his track "Under the Influence" is similar to the song.
2003, Dream Theater's song "Endless Sacrifice" from Train of Thought album contains a guitar melody similar to the song.
2009, Allison Iraheta performed the song on the eighth season of American Idol, and a studio recording was released on iTunes.
2009, French hip hop artist Kery James sampled "Give In to Me" on his song "Lettre à Mon Public".
2010, Tech N9ne's song "Last Sad Song" contains a piano melody similar to Jackson's song.
2012, Three Days Grace included a cover of this song on their album Transit of Venus.
2006, Justin Timberlake Sampled The Song on " Summer Love " on his Album FutureSex/LoveSounds .
