Gackt Camui (神威 楽斗, Kamui Gakuto, born July 4, 1973), better known by his stage name Gackt, is a Japanese musician, singer, songwriter and actor. He has been active since 1993, first as the frontman of the short-lived independent band Cains:Feel, and then for the now defunct visual kei rock band Malice Mizer, before starting his solo career in 1999. He has released nine studio albums and, with forty-six singles released, holds the male soloist record for most top ten consecutive singles in Japanese music history. His single "Returner (Yami no Shūen)", released on June 20, 2007, was his first single to reach the number one spot on the Oricon charts. He became the first Japanese artist to release his music catalog on iTunes in October 2007.
Besides being established in the modern entertainment industry, his music has been used as theme songs for video games (Final Fantasy VII), anime films (Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam) and television series. In addition to his music career Gackt has acted in a few films, including a film he wrote, Moon Child, and his international debut Bunraku, and TV series such as the NHK drama Fūrin Kazan. He also performed live in theatre stage plays, one of which was written, composed and directed by him: Moon Saga - Mysteries of Yoshitsune I&II.
Gackt was born on July 4, 1973, the second of three children in a Ryukyuan family, in Okinawa, Japan. His father was a music teacher, who primarily played the trumpet, and his mother was also a teacher. Gackt has an older sister and a younger brother. Because of his father's job, he lived in many different cities in addition to Okinawa: Yamaguchi, Fukuoka, Shiga, Osaka, and Kyoto. Gackt's musical education began at age three, when his parents initiated his classical piano education. He grew tired of the piano at age seven when he entered elementary school, and because of moving had to change teachers. It would take another four years until his parents allowed him to quit lessons. Since his father played the trumpet, Gackt was also familiar with brass instruments. He has credited the classical pianist and composer Frédéric Chopin with being "the one who taught me the beauty, depth, fun, sadness, kindness of music; that music could grant people courage, and the meaning of the layers of sound. It isn't an exaggeration to say Chopin is the foundation of my music." Having only listened to classical music and enka while growing up, he did not become interested in rock music until he was a young adult. He cites Led Zeppelin's "Stairway to Heaven" as being particularly inspiring, and went on to master modern percussion and electric guitar.
According to Gackt's autobiography Jihaku, he was a mischievous child and had a tendency to face death; at age seven he nearly drowned while swimming off the coast of Okinawa. After that near-death experience, he claims to have paranormal ability to see and speak with deceased people, as well as family members. At the age of ten, he was hospitalized with a gastrointestinal condition and had to remain at the hospital for a prolonged time. He made the acquaintance of several terminally ill children, some of whom died during his stay.
In the early 1990s, he stopped playing drums and had no studio band activities. He found himself working multiple jobs, among them as a sound technician at the studio. When Gackt was twenty-years old, he met guitarist You Kurosaki, his future solo career support guitarist, at a music livehouse, and they formed the band Cains:Feel (with biblical reference to the story of Cain and Abel). Because of the mediocre acquaintances at the moment Gackt became the frontman, and the band went to record a demo tape.
In 1995, he was introduced to the visual kei band Malice Mizer which was on hiatus due to the departure of frontman Tetsu. Gackt moved to Tokyo, and joined them in October 1995. As their vocalist and pianist, he contributed two songs in their catalog, "Regret" and "Le Ciel", the latter being their most successful single as a band. During this time, the band's fame soared; and, after four years and two studio albums, in January 1999, it was announced that he left the band. According to his autobiography, the members' differences, obsession, sudden income of money, and his isolation from the band led to his departure.
Gackt launched his solo career on January 1, 1999. After having completed his recordings, his first gig as a solo artist was the 99 Gackt Resurrection tour held in 12 locations across Japan. It was followed on May 12 with his debut release, extended play Mizérable, released by Nippon Crown. The album peaked at number two, spending 12 weeks on the Oricon charts. It was certified gold, for shipment of over two hundred thousand copies, by the RIAJ. It spanned the same titled single "Mizérable", which peaked at number three, spending nine weeks on the charts. In July, he performed at Shock Wave Illusion in Osaka and Tokyo. On August 11, Gackt released his second single, "Vanilla". It peaked at number four, spent 10 weeks on the charts, and enjoyed considerable success. It was certified gold by RIAJ.
In 2000, on February 9 and 16, the third and fourth singles were released, "Mirror" and "Oasis". They peaked at number nine and number seven, respectively, and both spent six weeks on the charts. His fifth single was released on March 8, Seki-Ray, which peaked at number eight, charting for six weeks. At the beginning of the year, Gackt was joined by a support guitarist and associate producer Chachamaru, and for Caparison Guitars designed two guitars, named "Marcury" and "Venus", which he occasionally uses in his live performances. On April 26, his first full-length studio album, Mars, was released. It peaked at number three, spent five weeks on the charts, and was certified gold by RIAJ. The following day Gackt went on a nationwide tour Mars Sora Kara no Homonsha -Kaisō-, which included 16 concerts, and on July 1, he performed the final concert at Yokohama Arena. On August 30, the sixth single, "Saikai (Story)", was released. It peaked at number seven, spending six weeks on the charts. The seventh single, "Secret Garden", was released on November 16; it reached number 10, and charted for five weeks. On December 16, 2000, Gackt released the first in the series of Platinum Boxes.
In 2001, on March 14, Gackt released his eighth single, "Kimi no Tame ni Dekiru Koto", which peaked at number six, and charted for 18 weeks, Gackt's record until 2009. On April 25, the second studio album, Rebirth was released. It was Gackt's first concept album, conceived around the fictional narrative during the time of World War II, named "Requiem et Reminiscence". The album includes previously released singles "Seki-Ray" and "Secret Garden". It peaked at number three, spent 21 weeks on the charts, and was certified gold by RIAJ. On May 3, Gackt went on the Requiem et Reminiscence tour, which included 18 concerts at fourteen venues. The final concert was held on June 23 at the Yokohama Arena. His ninth single, "Another World" was released on September 5. It was Gackt's first single to reach number two spot on the charts, spent 17 weeks on them, and managed to sell over two hundred and fifty thousand copies, and became his best-selling single. "Another World" was certified gold by RIAJ. After the events of September 11th, 2001, in New York, Gackt wrote a song for a world peace. It was released December 2001 as a single, "Jūnigatsu no Love Song". It peaked at number five, and charted for nine weeks. From 2001 to 2004, the single was recorded in Japanese, English, Korean and Chinese, which were all released before Christmas. While in the second half of 2001, during the release of "Another World", Gackt started his second concept, project "Moon".
In 2002, on April 24, he released his eleventh single "Wasurenai Kara". It peaked at number four, spending five weeks on the charts. On June 6, Gackt went on the nationwide live house tour which represented his new concept and included nine concerts at eight venues. The final concert was held on July 10, at Zepp Sendai. On June 16, the third studio concept album Moon was released. It is Gackt's best-selling album, reached number two on the charts, and was certified gold by RIAJ. On September 22, at the Beijing Worker's Gymnasium, in China, a large musical event "China-Japan: Holding Hands, Moving Together" was held as part of "Japan-China Diplomatic Relations Normalization 30th Anniversary Commemoration", and Gackt was among the handful who represented his homeland. On October 14, he continued the concept with the nationwide tour Kagen no Tsuki (下弦の月?, The Waning Moon), which included 22 concerts among fifteen venues. The final concert was held on December 24, at the Yokohama Arena.
In 2003, Gackt worked on his film, Moon Child. He wrote the script and did own action scenes on location in Taiwan. In collaboration with co-star Hyde, he also sang the film's theme song "Orange no Taiyō" (オレンジの太陽, Orenji no Taiyō, "The Orange Sun"). The film was released on April 19 in Japan and screened on May 13 at the Cannes Film Festival and on April 12, 2004, at Philadelphia Film Festival. On March 19, his thirteenth single, "Kimi ga Oikaketa Yume", was released, which is the second of five to reach number two on the charts, spending 10 weeks on them. It was certified gold by RIAJ. On May 5 the nationwide tour Jōgen no Tsuki (上弦の月?, The Waxing Moon)was launched, continuing the concept of the previous one, and included 13 concerts at eight venues. On June 11, the fourteenth single, "Tsuki no Uta", was released. It peaked at number three, and it was certified gold by RIAJ. On July 6, the final concert of the tour was held at the Yokohama Arena. On September 27, he performed as a special guest at the TV Asahi 45th anniversary commemorative "Kingdom Rock Show". On October 2, Gackt performed the John Lennon song "Love", at the "Dream Power: John Lennon Super Live" concert organized by Yoko Ono in Saitama Super Arena. On September 26, Gackt released his autobiography Confession (自白, Jihaku). Besides the film and musical recordings for the project, in October he published a novel Moon Child Requiem (Moon Child 鎮魂歌),. On November 12, the sixteenth single, "Last Song", was released and peaked at number five. It spent 13 weeks on the charts and was certified gold by RIAJ. On December 3, the fourth studio concept album, Crescent, was released. It also peaked at number five, through 11 weeks on the charts, and was certified platinum by RIAJ. On New Year's Eve 2003, Gackt performed for the first time at the annual music show, the 54th Kōhaku Uta Gassen.
In 2004, on February 25, was released his first compilation album, The Sixth Day: Single Collection, which was a collection of the singer's previous singles title songs, of some being re-recorded. It peaked at number three, spent 23 weeks on the charts, which is his record, and was certified platinum by RIAJ. On April 29, Gackt went on the nationwide tour The Sixth Day & Seventh Night, which included 15 concerts in eight venues. On May 26, Gackt released another compilation album, The Seventh Night: Unplugged, containing the acoustic arrangements of previously released songs. It peaked at number five, spent eight weeks on the charts, and was certified gold by RIAJ. On July 4th was held the final concert of the tour at the Yokohama Arena. On October 27, the eighteenth single, "Kimi ni Aitakute", was released. It peaked at number two, spent 17 weeks on the charts, and was certified gold by RIAJ. On December 4, he appeared and performed at the M.net/Km Music Video Festival, where he received the award for "Best Asian Rock Artist".
In 2005, with the release of his previous single and the twentieth single "Arittake no Ai de" on January 26, which peaked at number seven, the unplugged theme was continued in the release of his fifth studio album, Love Letter, on Valentine's Day. It peaked at number five, spent 13 weeks on the charts, was certified gold by RIAJ, and was re-recorded in Korean and released on June 16 for the Korean market. With the release of his twenty-first single, "Black Stone", on April 27, Gackt switched to a more alternative rock style. The single peaked at number three and was certified gold by RIAJ. On May 25 followed the twenty-second single, "Metamorphoze", which was used in the movie Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam. It was his fourth single to reach number two, spent 13 weeks on the charts, and was certified gold by RIAJ. On August 10, Gackt released the twenty-third single, "Todokanai Ai to Shitteita no ni Osaekirezu ni Aishitsuzuketa...". It peaked at number three and was certified gold by RIAJ. On September 21, his sixth studio album, Diabolos, was released. Conceptually, it was a prequel entrant to the previous "Moon" albums. It reached number four on the charts and was certified gold by RIAJ, his last album to achieve this. Gackt went on, at the time, his longest nationwide tour, Diabolos ~Aien no Shi~, with 36 concerts across Japan, which ended with a final Christmas Eve spectacle at the Tokyo Dome, in front of more than forty-two thousand people.
In 2006, he continued his tour with a concert on January 14, in Korea, at Fencing Stadium in Korean Olympic Park, which was his first Asian solo concert. In the same month was released the twenty-fourth single, "Redemption", which included theme songs of the Square Enix game, Dirge of Cerberus: Final Fantasy VII. On February 28, he appeared at the graduation of the Maiko High School in Hyōgo Prefecture. Besides the words of encouragement, he performed an unreleased song especially written for the graduation. It was released the following year on February 7, as "No ni Saku Hana no Yō ni". Since then he appeared in several graduation ceremonies.
In August, at an Otakon conference, it was publicly announced that he would form a supergroup, S.K.I.N., with famous Japanese metal band X Japan co-founder Yoshiki, Luna Sea, and X Japan guitarist Sugizo, and guitarist Miyavi. Although there were high expectations for the group, since their debut performance on June 29, 2007, at the Anime Expo in Long Beach, California, no further activities were announced. On December 24, he went on a small nationwide fanclub tour "D.r.u.g. Party", which was also continued with four concerts in Korea and Taiwan.
In 2007, in January he played the warlord Uesugi Kenshin in the NHK Taiga drama Fūrin Kazan. On June 20, Gackt released his twenty-seventh single, "Returner (Yami no Shūen)", which was the first in his career (both solo and as a member of a band) to reach the number one spot on the Oricon charts. On August 23, Gackt was invited to perform his Fūrin Kazan television role at Jōetsu city's traditional, 82nd Kenshin Festival, with approximately 203,000 visitors. In October, he held a press conference at the Apple Store in Ginza, Tokyo, where besides advertising the first iPhone, Gackt announced he would have his entire back catalog, with new previously toured, live song recordings, put up on the iTunes Store, as well as that "The Greatest Filmography" would be released on October 9 in the United States and Canada, while his album Diabolos was released on October 26 in eighteen European countries. On November 17 and 27, he performed at M.net/Km Music Video Festival in Korea as the special guest star, and he appeared and performed at the "2007 Japan-China Cultural Exchange Grand Concert Final" in Beijing. In Beijing he sang "Jūnigatsu no Love Song" in Japanese, Korean, and Mandarin. On December 10, he appeared at the China Fashion Awards in Beijing, where was given the award "Japanese Artist of the Year". On December 19, Gackt released a compilation album, 0079–0088, including songs used in the Gundam franchise. Gackt also performed on the 58th Kōhaku Uta Gassen.
The year 2007 also saw the creation of the "Save our Dears" charity to help the victims of the powerful Chūetsu offshore earthquake that struck the Niigata Prefecture. To raise funds for this charity, Gackt designed a keychain and bracelets, in addition, the charity also featured two Orico UPty MasterCard credit cards. Gackt's fanclub Dears, raised ¥2,000,000 (US$26,041) which Gackt donated to the Jōetsu at the 83rd Kenshin Festival in 2008.
On July 31, 2008, Internet Co., Ltd. released Gackpoid, a Vocaloid using a recorded selection of Gackt's voice. On December 3, his twenty-eighth single "Jesus" was released, his first single release in over a year. It peaked at number seven, spending 10 weeks on the charts. On December 14, Gackt went on his longest nationwide tour Requiem et Reminiscence II -Saisei to Kaikō- (Requiem et Reminiscence II -再生と邂逅-?, -Rebirth and Reunion-), which included over 60 concerts in more than forty-five cities. On January 28, 2009, his twenty-ninth single "Ghost" was released, and peaked at number six on the charts. On May 18, Gackt was scheduled to perform a concert in South Korea at Seoul's Olympic Hall, but due to the effects of the global recession, the sponsors of the concert withdrew their support. In commemoration of his 10th anniversary as a solo artist, Gackt released four singles: "Koakuma Heaven", "Faraway", "Lost Angels", and "Flower", one week after another, starting from June 17 and ending on July 1. They all managed to enter the top ten on the charts. On June 13, Gackt began the arena part of the tour, and on July 4 held a fanclub concert to celebrate his birthday at the Yoyogi National Stadium. On July 11 and 12, he held the final concerts at the Saitama Super Arena.
As both Gackt and the Kamen Rider Series' Heisei period run had its 10th anniversary, he became involved in the 2009 edition of the franchise, Kamen Rider Decade, to perform its theme songs. These are the first singles that were not written by him, and were released by Avex Trax and Avex Entertainment. In March, his thirtieth single and the series' opening theme, "Journey Through the Decade", was released, peaking at number two and spending 25 weeks on the charts, and certified gold by RIAJ. In August, he released the second theme single for the Kamen Rider Decade film All Riders vs. Dai-Shocker, "The Next Decade". It peaked at number four, and spent nine weeks on the charts. He also appeared in the film as Decade's iteration of the character Jōji Yūki. The collaboration finished in January with the release of the final single, "Stay the Ride Alive", which charted the same as his previous one.
In September, he performed as a representative of Japan at the Asia Song Festival in Korea. He also participated in the 2009 Animelo Summer Live concert. In October, Gackt performed as the main artist in the "Wow Live! Thanks For Music" show held in Yoyogi National Gymnasium, in Japan. On December 2, he released his seventh studio album, Re:Born, which continued the story he had originally created in 2001. It reached number nine on the charts. On December 12, he held a fanclub cover concert conceptualized around fictional school, at the Saitama Super Arena.
In 2010, on February 14, Gackt participated as a representative of Japan at the Asia Pops Festival held in Niigata, in homage for the victims of 2007 Chūetsu earthquake. On March 6 and 7, he performed the theme songs in the festival organized by Koei to promote their new Wii game, Samurai Warriors 3, at the Saitama Super Arena. On April 17, he officially announced that he transferred from Nippon Crown to Avex Group's recording conglomerate. On May 14, began the theatre stage play of Nemuri Kyoshiro Buraihikae at Nissei Theatre, in which Gackt starred. The show ran for 120 performances in seven cities until February 27, 2011, with an estimated 150,000 spectators.
Prior to the transfer announcement to Avex, separately from his solo career, was organized a band, "Yellow Fried Chickenz", whose name refers to human cowardice. Besides the nationwide tour in June and August, from July 16, he made his first appearance touring Europe, performing at clubs in London, Paris, Barcelona, Munich, and Bochum. On July 21, the compilation album, The Eleventh Day: Single Collection, was released, which was a collection of the singer's singles from the second half of his tenure with the label. On August 23, he participated in the 85th Kenshin Festival for the third time, with event record attendance of more than 240,000 visitors. On December 14, he participated in and performed in a Hohoemi project charity event called "Message! to Asia", by DATV at Tokyo Dome, whose profits were planned to help street children in Cambodia and the Philippines. For an auction at the event, he auctioned his custom 1999 Pontiac Firebird Trans Am MS6, which was sold for ¥6,015,000 (US$72,033).
In 2011, because of the Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, Gackt founded the "Show Your Heart" charity for collecting money to buy supplies for the victims. In March, a truck convoy with 72,000 lb (33,000 kg) of food and clothes was delivered and he held a nationwide street-corner fund-raising campaign, which collected ¥25,234,490 (or US$320,193). All money collected through bank transfers and street fundraising activities was transferred to the Japanese Red Cross, totalling ¥208,181,735 (US$2,641,564). In July and August, the band toured Europe for the second time and later toured across Japan. The Japanese part of tour revenue was donated to the Japanese Red Cross. A year later on July 4, at the concert in Nippon Budokan the band was disbanded. On August 22, he participated at the 86th Kenshin Festival.
In 2012, Gackt announced a plan to continue the concept of "Moon" with a stage theatre play, Moon Saga - Mysteries of Yoshitsune, on July 15, at Akasaka ACT Theatre in Tokyo. The final two, of 60 shows, were on September 26 and October 2, in Tokyo. On March 18 and 19, Gackt appeared at the Gala party for FilmAid Asia, and 6th Asian Film Awards, where he also performed, as part of Hong Kong International Film Festival in Hong Kong. On March 29, Gackt performed the national anthem Kimigayo at the Major League Baseball season opening game in Tokyo Dome. It was his fourth time performing the national anthem. On December 15, performed on the 45 anniversary concert of All Night Nippon, at the Yoyogi National Stadium. In the same month, on December 19, his forty-third single, "White Lovers (Shiawase na Toki)", was released.
In 2013 his first national tour in four years was announced, Best of the Best Vol. I, which started on May 11, and ended with three consecutive shows on July 7 at the Yokohama Arena. In July, it was accompanied with two compilation albums, Mild and Wild. On August 22, he participated at the 88th Kenshin Festival. On December 22, the final concert of the fourth festival of cover concerts was held and was conceptualized around fictional school. On December 26, a special live concert was held where Gackt performed along with the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra.
In 2014, since February 12, with the release of his forty-fourth single "P.S. I Love U", his records were released by his independent record label G&Lovers distributed by Crown Tokuma. The second "Moon" stage theatre adaptation ran from August until October, with 40 performances in seven cities, and released its original soundtrack. In August, Gackt participated at the 89th Kenshin Festival. On October 1, Gackt released his forty-fifth single, "Akatsukizukuyo (Day Breakers)". On December 26, the second live concert with Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra was held.
In celebration of Gackt's 15th anniversary on July 1, 2015, the remix album titled, Gacktracks -Ultra DJ ReMix-, was released. It contained club remix versions of his songs done by Japanese DJs, including DJ Koo, Taku Takahashi, Tomoyuki Tanaka (FPM), Jazztronik, Marc Panther and many others. Gackt stated he personally would not decide to do the project from a musical perspective because he was not fond of club music.... He chose the DJs on a first-come, first-served basis, and, because of the great interest for participation, he believed in a second collaboration in the near future. He also expressed his concern on the decline of originality and growing irrelevance of music in modern daily life. On July 3 a release party was also held.
On August 8, 2015 was announced the first national tour in seven years, Last Visualive. Although the original intention was for it to be held in 2015, it was postponed to 2016. It is anticipated to start with a fanclub only concert on March 19, 2016 at Misato City Cultural Hall in Saitama, and publicly on March 21 at Colany Hall in Yamanashi, and to end on July 2 at Saitama Super Arena. On August 23, Gackt participated at the 90th Kenshin Festival for the seventh time overall, with a record high 243,000 visitors. On October 7, 2015 was released the forty-sixth single, "Arrow".
The eighth studio album Last Moon was released on April 27, 2016.
Gackt’s introduction in filmmaking, in addition to music videos, came in 2001 and 2002 with two TV documentaries, Fly to Madagascar and Hero’s Hero.
In 2003, he worked on the script and starred in his film, Moon Child. It was released on April 19 in Japan, and screened on May 13 at the Cannes Film Festival and on April 12, 2004, at Philadelphia Film Festival. He voiced Seiji in the original video animation, New Fist of the North Star, for which two of his older songs were used as themes and released as a single. Gackt also assisted as a model and provided the voice and the motion capture for a main character in the video game Bujingai by Taito Corporation and Red Entertainment.
His next involvement was in 2006, with the Final Fantasy VII franchise, for a video game Dirge of Cerberus, and again in 2007 for a video game Crisis Core, where the character Genesis Rhapsodos was modeled on, voiced and co-created by Gackt. Besides that, Gackt composed and performed two theme songs for the first game, which were released in the single "Redemption".
In 2007, Gackt played the Sengoku period daimyo Uesugi Kenshin at the NHK Taiga drama, Fūrin Kazan, for which he received the TV Navi award for best supporting actor in a drama category. His only topping single, "Returner (Yami no Shūen)", title song was the theme for the TV series. He was also the voice actor in the Japanese version of the French/American animated-live action film, Arthur and the Minimoys. In 2008, Gackt was filming in Romania for his first international film debut, Bunraku, which was released in 2010. The next year (2009) he appeared as a prisoner on death row in the second episode of the TV series, Mr. Brain, and the film Kamen Rider Decade: All Riders vs. Dai-Shocker.
In 2010, he was the voice actor in several occasions. For the film Arthur and the Revenge of Maltazard, the anime series Shiki, his first regular voice cast role, and Tono to Issho, where he provided the voice for the previous daimyo, and for the two video games, Dragon Nest, for which he composed and performed the theme song, "Ever", and Mobile Suit Gundam: Extreme Vs.. In 2011, he was the voice actor for the sequel of Tono to Issho anime series, Supernatural: The Animation (episode 21 first season), and Sket Dance for which he also performed its theme, "Graffiti", and TV drama, Tempest. He was also a voice actor and theme song performer for the animated film, Dragon Age: Dawn of the Seeker.
In 2012, Gackt appeared in the Sengoku Basara television drama, Sengoku Basara: Moonlight Party, as the games' depiction of warlord Oda Nobunaga. He also performed the series' theme song "Hakuro" (42nd single). He was also seen in a dual role as a Professor of Neurology "Shiki Takashi" & "Yumeoji" (literally translated "Dream Prince) in the drama Akumu-chan, which is based on the novel "Yume Chigai" by Onda Riku.
In November 2013, Gackt appeared as a guest-star in two episodes (21 & 22) of Indonesian Tokusatsu Series, Bima Satria Garuda, as "Noir", the mysterious "Bima Legend" Knight from Parallel World. In 2014, he repeated his role in the movie Akumu-chan, and was set to star in drama "Time Spiral" as the University professor Shuya Tatsumi, based on the web novel "Tokeru Rasen" by Eren Mizumori.
In 2015, Gackt made a cameo appearance in Origami, a short film by director Cato Ochi. It premiered at the Cannes Film Festival. In 2016, it was announced that Gackt was to have his first lead role after 14 years in the movie Karanukan (2017) directed by Yasuhiro Hamano. The movie is set at the Yaeyama Islands of Okinawa, and he will portray a photographer who falls in love with a girl who mysteriously disappears.
When he was 20 years old, Gackt was briefly married to a Korean woman. He stated that his philosophical way of life is similar to Japanese Bushido.
Arena tours:
2000: Mars Sora Kara no Homonsha (Mars 空からの訪問者)
2001: Requiem et Reminiscence
2002: Kagen no Tsuki (下弦の⽉)
2003: Jogen no Tsuki (上弦の⽉)
2004: The Sixth Day & Seventh Night
2005-06: Diabolos ~Aien no Shi~ (Diabolos 〜哀婉の詩〜)
2008-09: Requiem et Reminiscence II ~Saisei to Kaikou~ (Requiem et Reminiscence Ⅱ 〜再生と邂逅〜)
2013: Best of the Best Vol. I
2016: Last Visualive Saigo no Tsuki –Last Moon– (Last Visualive 最期ノ月 –Last Moon–)
Club tours:
1999: Easter Live
1999: Shockwave Illusion Live
2000: Starlight Gig
2006-07: Training Days D.r.u.g. Party
