Two Steps from Hell is an American production music company based in Los Angeles, California, founded by Thomas J. Bergersen and Nick Phoenix in 2006. The company focuses predominantly on movie and trailer music, and has supplied tracks to films such as Harry Potter, Pirates of the Caribbean, and X-Men.
Two Steps from Hell was founded in 2006 when Thomas Bergersen and Nick Phoenix joined forces to write original music for movie trailers. Bergersen moved from Trondheim, Norway to the United States in 2003, along with Phoenix, who began composing in 1997, before moving to Los Angeles. The two formed the company in early 2006, and have composed music for over 1,000 major motion picture trailers.
Two Steps from Hell mainly produces trailer music and epic music, although recently it has also been used for television shows and video games.
Despite the company finding success for its music, the tracks were never officially released to the public until the May 2010 release of the commercial album Invincible. In addition to approaching Gold record status, Invincible became the first of several such albums to chart in the iTunes Top 100 Soundtracks. As of July 2014, Two Steps from Hell has published 8 public albums in addition to 20 demonstration albums, with almost 1,000 unique tracks in total.
The album Sun, which was released on September 30, 2014, is the second solo album from Thomas Bergersen. Preview tracks were released from the album, titled Cry and Sun, the former of which can be downloaded from Bergersen's official website. An official music video for "Sun" was also released on YouTube, preceding the announcement of a signed limited deluxe edition CD release set to include additional tracks and notes from Thomas, as well as a large-size poster featuring his artwork.
Additionally, in July 2014 Two Steps from Hell released an e-book known as Colin Frake on Fire Mountain, which features a 75,000-word novel written by Nick Phoenix with illustrations by Otto Bjornik, as well as an original score also made available via a soundtrack release.
Two Steps from Hell's main graphic artist is Steven Gilmore, who has created album covers for almost every promotional and public release, including the logo of the company, with the only exception being the 2009 DVD release of their library, for which the album cover was created by Paul Zeaiter. Additionally, Thomas Bergersen's Illusions solo album features design by Jesper Krijgsman, while its sequel, Sun, features artwork created by Thomas himself.
The company's music has been featured in:
Trailers for, but not limited to: Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2, Star Trek, Star Trek Into Darkness, The Dark Knight, The Fighter, Rise of the Planet of the Apes, Tron: Legacy, Anna Karenina, No Country for Old Men, 2012, Captain America: The First Avenger, The Avengers, X-Men: First Class, X-Men: Days of Future Past, Pirates of the Caribbean: At World's End, Super 8, Inception, World War Z, The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader, Lincoln, WALL-E, Up, The Twilight Saga: Eclipse, Hugo, The Town, Priest, Prince of Persia, Interstellar and The Man Who Knew Infinity.
Video games such as Resident Evil 6, Mass Effect 2, Mass Effect 3 (Taking Back Earth trailer, Black Blade), PlanetSide 2, Killzone 3, Star Wars: The Old Republic, Elder Scrolls Online, League of Legends (E-sports tournaments; Various Pieces from the Burn album), The Witcher 3 (A Night to Remember Trailer; A Hole in the Sun), F1 2013 and Assassin's Creed IV: Black Flag.
Television series such as Breaking Bad, Doctor Who, Game of Thrones, Sherlock, I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!, Revolution, Homeland, The Walking Dead, Supernatural, Merlin, Deadliest Warrior, Nathan for You, The World Wars, and during the 2012 London Olympics. The track "Archangel", from the album of the same name, was also used in an episode of Britain's Got Talent. The track Nero was also used in the Top Gear special: The Perfect Road Trip, and Heart of Courage was used in season 17, episode 3 of the series.
Two Steps from Hell's music is also used extensively in a variety of places, from global events to local concerts, some of which are listed below:
Their song Heart of Courage was used in the beginning of UEFA Euro 2012 matches, in the beginning of the London 2012 Olympic games athletics finals and also in a promotional video for the 2011 World Youth Day in Madrid.
The song Invincible was performed live by Royal Marine Bands in the Royal Albert Hall in London in April 2013.
On June 4, 2012, an official app was announced for iOS and Android, containing 19 tracks of previously released music in a compilation album called Demon's Dance. The app was announced via the company's official Twitter feed. The app was officially released on June 26, 2012 for iOS, followed by the Android release the next day.
American artistic gymnast Alicia Sacramone used Heart of Courage combined with another song for her floor routine in 2011.
Ukrainian rhythmic gymnast Alina Maksymenko used a medley of songs of the team producers for her hoop routine in 2012, she finished 6th at the rhythmic gymnastics individual all around final in London. That same medley was used in 2013 by Italian artistic gymnast Enus Mariani for her floor routine.
Swiss artistic gymnast Giulia Steingruber used the song Love and Loss as her floor music in 2013.
2013 America's Got Talent winner Kenichi Ebina used a number of songs in his performances en route to his victory in the reality show, including Ocean Princess, Promise and For The Win.
The Calgary Flames used the song "Sons of War" in their 2011-2012 season opening video.
Russian figure skater Elena Radionova used the song Nero as her short program music in 2013-2014.
Australian snooker player Neil Robertson uses Heart Of Courage as his walk on music in competitions.
The song 'Heart Of Courage' was used by the Springbok rugby team in May 2015 in their build up video for the 2015 IRB World Cup.
In October 2015, Microsoft used the song "Rebirth" from the Orion album in the unveiling of the company's first laptop, the Surface Book.
Two Steps from Hell hosted a live concert on June 14, 2013 at the Disney Hall, in Los Angeles, California, performing some of their most popular songs, such as "Heart of Courage," "Protectors of the Earth," "To Glory," "Strength of a Thousand Men," "Black Blade," and "Breathe," as well as "Ocean Princess," '"Age of Gods," and "Remember Me" from Bergersen's album Illusions. The next day, they confirmed on Facebook further concerts, with venues and dates to be announced. On June 26, 2013, Bergersen confirmed the next concert to take place in Europe, intending to begin touring at some point in 2016.
Source: 
Invincible (2010) — Compilation of some of the most popular Two Steps from Hell tracks. Also available on ExtremeMusic.
Illusions (2011) — Thomas Bergersen solo album, formerly titled Nemesis II. Also available on ExtremeMusic.
Archangel (2011) — Compilation of more of the most popular Two Steps from Hell tracks.
Demon's Dance (2012) — Compilation of tracks from various albums spanning multiple genres, available only on the Two Steps from Hell app for iOS and Android.
Halloween (2012) — Compilation of well-known horror tracks from several demonstration albums, with several other-genre tracks as well.
SkyWorld (2012) — First public album to use mostly all-new tracks. Expanded version available on ExtremeMusic.
Classics Volume One (2013) — Compilation of previously unreleased tracks in the same vein as Invincible and Archangel. First public album available in lossless audio. Expanded version available on ExtremeMusic.
Speed of Sound (2013) — Nick Phoenix album. All-new tracks. Also available on ExtremeMusic.
Miracles (2014) — An epic drama/emotional album with the best of Illumina, Dreams & Imaginations, Two Steps From Heaven, and a few new tracks composed by Thomas Bergersen.
Colin Frake on Fire Mountain (2014) — Soundtrack for an e-book penned by Nick Phoenix. Composed by Thomas Bergersen with additional music by Nick Phoenix.
Sun (2014) — All new tracks by Thomas Bergersen. Follow-up to Illusions. Also available on ExtremeMusic.
Battlecry (2015) — Public Album; "ultra epic" follow-up to SkyWorld and the first public album to be released on two discs. Also available on ExtremeMusic.
Legacy (2015) — Japan-exclusive album featuring compiled tracks from previous public albums.
Classics Volume Two (2015) — Compilation of new and previously unreleased tracks.
Source: 
Volume One (2006) — First album, featuring various genres
Shadows and Nightmares (2006) — Horror genre album, along with a sound effects library
Dynasty (2007) — Epic genre album
All Drums Go to Hell (2007) — Heavily percussion-oriented album
Pathogen (2007) — Epic futuristic metal album mostly composed by Nick Phoenix
Nemesis (2007) — Epic genre album mostly composed by Thomas Bergersen
Dreams & Imaginations (2008) — New Age album
Legend (2008) — Epic genre album, with some tracks composed by Troels Folmann
Ashes (2008) — Horror genre album
The Devil Wears Nada (2009) — Mostly light and humorous album
Power of Darkness (2010) — Epic genre album
All Drones Go to Hell (2010) — New Age album; also known as Mystical Beginnings.
Illumina (2010) — New Age album
Balls to the Wall (2011) — Percussion album, with some tracks composed by Alex Pfeffer.
Nero (2011) — Epic genre album, with some tracks composed by Alex Pfeffer.
Two Steps from Heaven (2012) — Pet project of Thomas Bergersen, featuring inspiring, emotional, and adventurous music.
Burn (2012) — A small collection of eight dubstep remixed tracks.
Cyanide (2013) — Percussion album
Crime Lab (2013) — electronic industrial album
Open Conspiracy (2014) — Electronic Hybrid album composed by Hitesh Ceon, Nick Pittsinger, Thomas Bergersen and Nick Phoenix.
Amaria (2014) — new age/drama album composed by Thomas Bergersen.
Too Big to Fail (2014) — Sound effects library / Trailer toolkit.
Empire (2015) — Industry Album. Mostly consists of tracks from Classics Volume Two composed by Nick Phoenix.
Stronger Faster Braver (2015) — Subtitled as "Extreme Sports Music". Motivational, energetic and driving compositions.
There are a number of albums made by other composers from the company, which are not considered part of the primary library and are consequently not represented on official Two Steps from Hell resources. They include:
Sinners (2011) — Electronic metal album composed by Aleksandar Dimitrijevic
Faction (2012) — Dark drones and soundscapes. Putative author is "Brad Rue", as shown on ExtremeMusic.com.
Solaris (2013) — Epic futuristic metal album, actually composed by Alex Pfeffer, who had previously contributed several tracks to the "Nero" album.
Orion (2013) — Short epic hybrid album composed by Michał Cielecki.
Quarantine (2014) — Sci-fi electronica album composed by Brad Rue.
Additionally, composer Troels Folmann contributed a number of tracks to the industry albums Dynasty, Dreams & Imaginations, and Legend, though he was credited only for the latter. 
Commercially available songs that are not on any album or were released as preview tracks. All of the following pieces are written by Bergersen, except where noted:
A Place in Heaven (2011) — Pre-release single from the Illusions album. Vocals performed by Jenifer Thigpen.
Ocean Princess (2011) — Pre-release single from the Illusions album. Vocals performed by Merethe Soltvedt.
Starvation (2011) — Pre-release single from the Illusions album.
Promise (2011) — Pre-release single from the Illusions album. Features cello performed by Tino Guo and vocals performed by Merethe Soltvedt.
Heart (2011) — Originally a single made to raise money to help the Tōhoku earthquake victims. Later included on the Two Steps from Heaven and Miracles albums.
The Hero in Your Heart (2013) — A single made to raise money to help the victims of the Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines. Lyrics written and performed by Merethe Soltvedt.
That's A Wrap (2014) — A dark, adventurous orchestral ten-minute song created entirely with Thomas's proprietary sample library.
Autumn Love (2014) — An emotional, piano-driven track in a similar style to Dreams and Imaginations.
Into Darkness (2014) — A nine-minute mix of neo-orchestral and EDM club style. Lyrics performed by Thomas Bergersen
Stay (2014) — A pop-themed pre-release single from the Miracles album. Lyrics written and performed by Merethe Soltvedt.
Miracles (2014) — A second pre-release single from the Miracles album.
Children of the Sun (2015) — Original vocal version of "None Shall Live" from the Battlecry album. Lyrics performed by Merethe Soltvedt.
Christmas Medley (2015) — An orchestral medley comprising various Christmas songs. The track is named Two Steps From Xmas on ExtremeMusic.com 
Songs that are not on any album or were initially released as preview tracks via Facebook. All of the following pieces are written by Bergersen, except when noted:
In Your Arms (2010) — A remix of "Memories" from the Dreams & Imaginations album, featuring Merethe Soltvedt.
Tower of Mischief (2011) — Intended as a preview track for the Two Steps from Heaven album, but ultimately released on Nero.
My Freedom (2011) — A track originally considered for release on Illusions. Later included on the Nero album. Lyrics performed by Merethe Soltvedt. Has since been released to the public on the album Miracles.
Benedictus (2011) — Originally intended for release on Sun. Later included on the Two Steps from Heaven album.
Where Are You (2011) — Pop-trance track with acoustic elements. Lyrics performed by Thomas Bergersen
My Soul, Not Yours (2012) — Experimental dubstep track. Later included on the Burn album as "Not Your Soul".
Hymn to Life (2012) — A track released on the occasion of Thomas's birthday. Later performed in a Czech concert as "Hymnus Vitae Dedicatus".
To Die on Halloween (2012) — A song from the public album, Halloween, with lyrics written and performed by Nick Phoenix. An official music video was released via YouTube.
Colin and Petunia (2014) — Preview track for the Colin Frake on Fire Mountain album. Retitled "Colin Frake" for its album release.
Freedom Ship (2015) — Preview track for the Battlecry album. Composed by Nick Phoenix.
Neverdark (2015) — Preview track for the Classics Volume Two album. Composed by Nick Phoenix.
With the founding in of the company in 2006 Bergersen was looking for a name that would draw attention with the old adage in mind "every PR is good PR". The idea for the name came from a Norwegian nightclub who according to Bergersen had a similar theme.
Epic Music
Trailer music
