Jordan "Jerry" Ragovoy (September 4, 1930 – July 13, 2011) was an American songwriter and record producer.
His best-known composition "Time Is on My Side" (written under the pseudonym of Norman Meade) was made famous by the Rolling Stones, although it had been recorded earlier by Kai Winding and Irma Thomas. Ragovoy also wrote "Stay With Me", which was originally recorded by Lorraine Ellison and made famous by Bette Midler in her film The Rose. It was also performed by Mary J. Blige at the 49th Grammy Awards.
Ragovoy was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the son of a Hungarian-born Jewish optometrist. He entered record production in 1953 with "My Girl Awaits Me" by the Castelles.
Another well-known song by Ragovoy is "Piece of My Heart", co-written with Bert Berns and recorded originally by Erma Franklin, and later famously covered by Janis Joplin with Big Brother and the Holding Company. Between 1966 and 1968, Ragovoy was employed as producer and songwriter for the Warner Bros subsidiary Loma Records. He also co-wrote several songs in Janis Joplin's solo career, including "Try (Just a Little Bit Harder)" (originally by Lorraine Ellison on Loma Records), "Cry Baby" (originally by Garnet Mimms and the Enchanters, "Get it While You Can" (originally by Howard Tate, covered by Joplin) and "My Baby". Prior to Joplin's death, Ragovoy wrote a song especially for her next album, titled "I'm Gonna Rock My Way to Heaven". The song was never recorded or performed until shortly before Ragovoy's death in July 2011, when it was included in the theatrical production One Night with Janis Joplin, written and directed by Randy Johnson with arrangements and musical direction by Len Rhodes. Ragovoy was in attendance on opening night when the show premiered at Portland Center Stage on May 27, 2011.
Ragovoy also produced recorded work by Bonnie Raitt and Milkwood. However, his involvement in the music industry was less prolific from the 1970s onwards.
In 1973, he won a Grammy Award as producer on Best Score From an Original Cast Show Album, for Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope.
In 1974, Ragovoy teamed up with Dionne Warwick to produce her Then Came You album, which peaked at No. 35 in the US Billboard R&B albums chart.
In 2003, Ragovoy worked again with Howard Tate. The pair returned with an acclaimed CD, Howard Tate Rediscovered, written, arranged and produced by Ragovoy.
In 2008, Ace Records released a compilation album entitled, The Jerry Ragovoy Story: Time Is on My Side.
In 2012, Ragovoy was portrayed by actor Brad Garrett in the film Not Fade Away.
Ragovoy died, following a stroke, on July 13, 2011, at the age of 80.
