Harvest Moon is the twentieth studio album by Canadian musician Neil Young, released on October 27, 1992. Many of the musicians appearing on it also appeared on his 1972 album Harvest, and it is considered by many to be like a "sequel" to Harvest.
Recovering from a case of tinnitus that had come about after the recording of 1990's Ragged Glory and its subsequent tour (which produced 1991's Weld and Arc), Young was determined to return to the studio. Returning to Nashville and joining up with compatriots like Ben Keith, Young put down the electric guitar, returning to the acoustic guitar, piano and banjo that had dominated albums such as Harvest, Comes a Time and Old Ways.
The album earned the 1994 Juno Award for album of the year. The 2009 release Dreamin' Man is a live album of the subsequent 1992 tour and contains live renditions of all Harvest Moon tracks in a different order.
Matthew Greenwald of AllMusic wrote glowingly of the title track, "Harvest Moon", calling the melody "positively gorgeous". Music website Classic Rock Review named Harvest Moon its album of the year for 1992. The album continued Young's commercial and critical resurgence following Freedom and Ragged Glory, eventually outselling both of those records.
All tracks written by Neil Young.
The Stray Gators
Neil Young — vocals, guitars, harmonica, banjo guitar, piano, pump organ, vibraphone
Ben Keith — pedal steel guitar, Dobro, bass marimba, backing vocals
Spooner Oldham — piano, pump organ, keyboards
Tim Drummond — bass, marimba, broom
Kenny Buttrey — drums
Larry Cragg — backing vocals on "War of Man"
Nicolette Larson — backing vocals on "You and Me," "War of Man," "Such a Woman," "Old King," "Dreamin' Man," "Natural Beauty"
Linda Ronstadt — backing vocals on "Unknown Legend," "From Hank to Hendrix," "Harvest Moon," "War of Man," "One of These Days"
James Taylor — backing vocals on "From Hank to Hendrix," "War of Man," "One of These Days"
Astrid Young — backing vocals on "War of Man," "Such a Woman," "Dreamin' Man"
Jack Nitzsche — string arrangement on "Such a Woman"
Suzie Katayama — conductor on "Such a Woman"
Maria Newman — concertmaster on "Such a Woman"
Maria Newman, Israel Baker, Betty Byers, Berg Garabedian, Harris Goldman, Robin Lorentz, Cindy McGurty, Haim Shtrum — violins on "Such a Woman"
Valerie Dimond, Matt Funes, Rick Gerding, Carrie Prescott, David Stenske, Adriana Zoppo — violas on "Such a Woman"
Larry Corbett, Ericka Duke, Greg Gottlieb, David Shamban — cellos on "Such a Woman"
Album
Single
American singers Ann Wilson and Alison Krauss recorded a cover of "War of Man" for Wilson's 2007 album Hope & Glory.
