Sebastian Carmine Ingrosso (born 20 April 1983) is a Swedish DJ and record producer. He was also a former member of the electronic music supergroup Swedish House Mafia, together with friends Axwell and Steve Angello.
Born in Nacka, Sweden Ingrosso is of Italian descent and grew up in Stockholm, where he spent his teenage years in his choreographer father Vito Ingrosso's studio learning how to make music. His first official remix was released on Mega Records in 1999. He was ranked #26 in 2011 on DJ Mag's Top 100 DJ list, and won the award for the highest new entry into the chart in 2009, a record beaten only by Deadmau5 into the 2008 Top 100 DJ list at #10. Sebastian Ingrosso is head of A&R for his own record label, Refune, which has pioneered many artists in recent years including AN21, Max Vangeli, Style of Eye and Alesso.
Ingrosso is married since 2011 with the singer and songwriter Kinnda and they have two daughters, Melina Ingrosso and Miranda Ingrosso.
In 2014, Axwell and Sebastian Ingrosso officially formed the group Axwell Λ Ingrosso. They have since released six new singles together.
2002
Sheridan - Wants Vs. Needs
Robyn - Keep This Fire Burning (Ingrosso & Fader Remix)
2003
Arcade Mode - Your Love (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
2004
Dukes of Sluca - Don't Stop
Steve Angello - Acid / Euro
Eric Prydz - Call On Me (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
StoneBridge - Put 'Em High (Steve Angello & Sebastian Ingrosso Remix)
2005
In-N-Out - EQ-Lizer (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
Steve Lawler - That Sound (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
Robbie Rivera and StoneBridge - One Eye Shut (Steve Angello & Sebastian Ingrosso Remix)
Naughty Queen - Famous & Rich (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
Sahara - Everytime I Feel It (Steve Angello Remix)
Full Blown - Some Kinda Freak
The Modern - Industry
Joachim Garraud - Rock The Choice (Sebastian Ingrosso Remix)
Moby - Dream About Me
Tony Senghore - Peace (Sebastian Ingrosso Remix)
Ernesto vs Bastian - Dark Side Of The Moon (with Axwell)
Deep Dish - Say Hello (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
Röyksopp - 49 Percent (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
Alex Neri - Housetrack
DJ Flex and Sandy W - Love For You (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
2006
Ultra DJ's - Me & U (Steve Angello & Sebastian Ingrosso Edit)
Justin Timberlake - My Love (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
Eric Prydz vs. Floyd - Proper Education
Julien Jabre - Swimming Places (Sebastian Ingrosso Re-Edit)
2007
Hard-Fi - Suburban Knights (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
2008
Felix Da Housecat featuring P. Diddy - Jack U (Angello & Ingrosso Remix)
2010
Mohombi - Bumpy Ride
Miike Snow - Silvia (Sebastian Ingrosso & Dirty South Remix)
2011
Chris Brown featuring Benny Benassi - Beautiful People (Sebastian Ingrosso Edit)
2016
Salvatore featuring Enya & Alex Aris - Dive (Ingrosso & Salvatore Remix)
Swedish popular music
