Against is the seventh studio album by the Brazilian metal band Sepultura, released in 1998 through Roadrunner Records. It is the band's first release with new frontman Derrick Green, who replaced group founder Max Cavalera in 1997.
The album shows strong elements of world music. It also uses elements of several other genres including hardcore punk, crossover thrash, groove metal, death metal, experimental metal, alternative metal and nu metal.
Like Roots that preceded it, the album has a variety of guest musicians and incorporates tribal influences – Japanese percussion elements are added with the assistance of Japanese taiko group Kodo.
The songs "Against", "Choke" and "Tribus" were released as singles, with a music video accompanying "Choke". The video featured footage from the Barulho Contra Fome (Noise Against Hunger) concert that was the first gig of the Against tour. This performance included guest appearances from the Xavantes tribe, who had featured on Roots (as documented in the "Choke" video) as well as Mike Patton, Jason Newsted, Carlinhos Brown, original Sepultura guitarist Jairo Guedz and Coffin Joe (whose "blessing" of the band performed during this concert turned up as a B-side entitled "Prenúncio" on the Tribus EP).
The flute section of "Kamaitachi" performed by Kodo is heavily based on that in "The Hunted" which appeared on Kodo's Ibuki album and was originally composed for the soundtrack of the movie of the same name. The song "The Waste" (a vocal version of "Kamaitachi" featuring Mike Patton on vocals which appeared on the single B-sides) is featured in the movie Freddy vs. Jason and its soundtrack.
The band supported Metallica in the latter's May 1999 tour in Brazil.
Against was a commercial disappointment compared to Roots, selling only 18,000 copies its first week in the US. Against has sold over 130,000 copies in the United States. Allmusic gave the album 3 stars out of 5 and said that, "there are enough flashes of the old Sepultura brilliance to suggest that great things are still to come."
All music composed by Sepultura, except where noted.
*on the Vanishing Point soundtrack as "Freedom of Expression"
"Choke" – Released in 1998.
"Against" – Released in 1999
"Tribus" – Released in 1999
Album – Billboard (North America)
Derrick Green – vocals
Andreas Kisser – lead guitar and vocals
Paulo Jr. – bass
Igor Cavalera – drums
Recorded at
ION Studios, São Paulo, Brazil
House of Blues Studios, Encino, California, USA
The Hook Studios, North Hollywood, USA
Sparky Dark Studios, Calabasas, California, USA
Image Studios, Los Angeles, California, USA
Chophouse Studio, Walnut Creek, California, USA
Golden Track Studios, San Diego, California, USA
KODO Village, Sado Island, Japan
Produced by Howard Benson and Sepultura
Recorded and engineered by Carlo Bartolini
Mixed by Tim Palmer at Scream Studios, Studio City, California, USA
Mixed by Howard Benson and Bobbie Brooks at The Gallery, Encino, California, USA
Mix assisted by James Saez and Mark Moncrief
Assistant engineered by David Bryant, Daniel Mantovani, Tosh Kasai, and James Bennett
Tape Op by Skye A.K. Correa
