C minor (abbreviated c or Cm) is a minor scale based on C, consisting of the pitches C, D, E♭, F, G, A♭, and B♭. The harmonic minor raises the B♭ to B♮. Changes needed for the melodic and harmonic versions of the scale are written in with naturals and accidentals as necessary.
Its key signature consists of three flats. Its relative major is E-flat major, and its parallel major is C major.
In the Baroque period, music in C minor was usually written with a two-flat key signature, and some modern editions of that repertoire retain that convention.
Of the two piano concertos that Mozart wrote in a minor key, one of them (No. 24, K. 491) is in C minor.
C minor has been associated with heroic struggle since Beethoven's time. Beethoven wrote some of his most characteristic works in the key of C minor, including the Symphony No. 5 and no fewer than three piano sonatas. (See Beethoven and C minor.)
Brahms's first symphony and first string quartet were composed in C minor; these were both genres with which Beethoven was closely associated during Brahms's lifetime.
Three of Anton Bruckner's ten numbered symphonies are in C minor, as are two of Dmitri Shostakovich's symphonies.
Passacaglia and Fugue in C minor, BWV 582 – Bach
Cello Suite No. 5, BWV 1011 – Bach
The Musical Offering, BWV 1079 – Bach
Great Mass in C minor – Mozart
Piano Concerto No. 24 – Mozart
Piano Sonata No. 8 (Pathétique) – Beethoven
Piano Concerto No. 3 – Beethoven
Symphony No. 5, Beethoven
Choral Fantasy, Op. 80 (1808) – Beethoven
Piano Sonata No. 32 – Beethoven
Piano sonata No. 1 – Chopin
Étude Op. 10, No. 12 (Revolutionary) – Chopin
Nocturne in C minor, Op. 48, No. 1 – Chopin
Rondo Op. 1 – Chopin
Prélude Op. 28/20 – Chopin
Symphony No. 1 – Brahms
String quartet op. 51/1 – Brahms
Piano trio No. 3 – Brahms
Piano quartet No. 3 – Brahms
Symphony No. 3 (Organ Symphony) – Saint-Saëns
Symphony No. 1 – Bruckner
Symphony No. 2 – Bruckner
Symphony No. 8 – Bruckner
Piano Concerto No. 2 – Rachmaninoff
Symphony No. 2 "Auferstehung" – Mahler
String quartet No. 8 – Shostakovich
Symphony No. 4 – Shostakovich
Symphony No. 8 – Shostakovich
