Simon Rex Cutright professionally known as Dirt Nasty (born July 20, 1974), is an American actor, rapper, comedian, record producer, model, and former VJ. He is known for being an MTV VJ turned rapper and comedian under an alter ego, Dirt Nasty, which has received a cult following on social media websites. He has starred as Jeff Campbell in the first season of What I Like About You, as George Logan in Scary Movie 3 and 4, and as Dan Sanders in 5. And as Derek in National Lampoon's Pledge This!
Rex was born in San Francisco, California, and is one of two children of Paul and Zoe Cutright, a relationship coach and an environmental consultant. He attended Alameda High School in Alameda, California. He is Jewish on his mother's side.
In 1993, at age 19, Rex responded to a modeling advertisement in a Los Angeles magazine and agreed to be photographed nude for photographer Brad Posey and his Club 1821 studio. The following year, under the alias Sebastian, he appeared in solo masturbation scenes for three Club 1821 pornographic films: Young, Hard & Solo #2, Young, Hard & Solo #3, and Hot Sessions III. Archive footage was used in the 2000 films Hot Sessions 11 and Hot Sessions 12. Rex also went on to appear in mainstream modeling gigs for Calvin Klein, Levi's, and Tommy Hilfiger.
In 1995, Rex was introduced to television audiences by MTV who hired Rex to work as a VJ and kept him on the air for over two years.
Rex soon after hit fame and popularity delving into acting, and in 1999, he was cast in the comedy-drama television series Jack & Jill, which aired on The WB for two seasons. He appeared as Eli in the TV show Felicity and television guest appearances followed including Baywatch, Everwood, and Summerland. From 2002 to 2003, he starred in the first season of The WB's sitcom What I Like About You. He later appeared on the Lifetime primetime telenovela Monarch Cove, which ran for fourteen episodes in 2006. In 2009, Rex starred opposite Paris Hilton, Jaime Pressley, and Lance Bass in a pilot titled Rex, created by Guy Shalem.
Rex has appeared in the films The Forsaken, Scary Movie 3, The Karate Dog, Scary Movie 4, Superhero Movie, and Scary Movie 5. He also starred in National Lampoon's Pledge This! with Hilton.
Rex entered the music industry as a rap artist after becoming friends with Mickey Avalon. Rex adopted his alter-ego "Dirt Nasty" as a erotic hard-core musician and formed the rap group Dyslexic Speedreaders, along with Mickey Avalon, Andre Legacy, and Beardo. Rex often toured with the group and collaborated to create the Shoot To Kill mixtape. The group ended abruptly, as Mickey Avalon left due to personal problems involving Rex and Andre Legacy. Dirt Nasty and Mickey Avalon reconciled in 2015 and went on to announce a series of tour dates together in Colorado.
In 2007, he released his self-titled debut album which included viral exposure from the single "1980". Rex has appeared on Paris Hilton's My New BFF in his Dirt Nasty persona and in Kesha's video for her song "Tik Tok". He appeared in LMFAO's music videos for "Yes" and "Sexy and I Know It".
In 2010, he and Nik Nikateen (music producer) produced a girl group "NEAPOLITAN" with various artist ( Lauren Elise aka "Wiskazz", Baby Cupcake, & Lil Coochie) and made few songs "Baby Box", "Charlie Sheen", "Crazy Girls", "XXXmas", "Bang Bang" and "I Don't Luv U Baby". The group started performing their songs at The Roxy Theature. Wiskazz also appeared on Rex's album Nasty As I Wanna Be with music video and his song Boombox
In 2011, he created a rap duo called Chain Swangaz with Grammy Award-winning producer Jack Splash, leading up to the release of his second album titled Nasty As I Wanna Be which featured guest appearances from artists such as Too Short, Warren G, Kesha, LMFAO. It debuted and stayed at the top of Billboard (magazine)'s comedy charts for weeks.
In 2012, he created the rap trio Three Loco, with Andy Milonakis, previously known for The Andy Milonakis Show, and RiFF RaFF. In November, the trio teamed up with producer Diplo and released the group's eight-song EP on Diplo's own Mad Decent label which garnished them critical acclaim from the likes of MTV, Pitchfork Media, and Vice magazine. He is credited under his Dirt Nasty persona.
On August 20, 2013, he released his solo album "Palatial."
In 2014, Rex teamed up with Andre Legacy and Beardo to form a new side project called The White Boys. The trio released the self-titled 8-track album, "The White Boys," on March 25, 2015.
Rex was a co-owner of the New York City nightclub The Plumm with partners Noel Ashman, Samantha Ronson, Chris Noth, and others. However, Plumm is now closed.
Catching Up to Wilt (with Mickey Avalon, Andre Legacy, and Beardo) (2004)
Dirt Nasty (2007)
Shoot to Kill (with Mickey Avalon, Andre Legacy, and Beardo) (2008)
The White Album (with DJ Stretch Armstrong) (2010)
Nasty as I Wanna Be (2010)
Palatial (2013)
The White Boys (with Andre Legacy and Beardo) (2014)
Breakfast In Bed (with Smoov-e) (2015)
The White Album (2010)
¡Three Loco! (with Andy Milonakis and Riff Raff) (2012)
Mickey Avalon – "My Dick" from Mickey Avalon (2005)
Luckyiam – "Nevermind" from Most Likely to Succeed (2007)
Verb – "1980 Gutter" from The East Side Extraterrestrial EP (2009)
Mac Lethal – "My Cadillac" from Postcards from Kansas EP
The Grouch & Eligh – "Can't Catch Me" from No More Greener Grasses (2003)
Luckyiam – "Rap, Rap, Rap" from Most Likely to Succeed (2007)
