Philip Anthony Campbell (born 7 May 1961) is a Welsh rock musician. He is most noted for his time with hard rock band Motörhead. He played with them from 1984 to 2015, and appeared on 21 albums, including live albums. Aside from Motörhead, Campbell has played for Persian Risk and Phil Campbell's All Starr Band.
Campbell was born in Pontypridd, and started playing guitar when he was 10 years old, inspired by guitarists such as Jimi Hendrix, Black Sabbath's Tony Iommi, Led Zeppelin's Jimmy Page, Jan Akkerman, Michael Schenker and Todd Rundgren. At the age of 12, Campbell got Lemmy's autograph after a Hawkwind gig. By the time he was 13, he was playing semi-professionally with a cabaret band called Contrast. Later he played with a pub-rock band called Roktopus (not to be confused with Rocktopus) at gigs in and around South Wales. He bought his first Les Paul in 1978 at a New Year's Day guitar sale at a shop on Ealing Broadway, London; following the fate of many of his guitars, it was stolen.
In 1979 he formed the heavy metal band, Persian Risk, playing on their 7" singles, "Calling For You" (1981) and "Ridin' High" (1983). Compilation albums have been issued which feature some of his work with Persian Risk.
On 8 February 1984, following the departure of Brian Robertson, Motörhead frontman, Lemmy, held auditions for a new guitarist, narrowing the candidates down to two guitarists – Michael "Würzel" Burston and Philip Campbell. Lemmy had first planned only to hire one guitarist, but upon hearing Würzel and Campbell play together, Lemmy hired them both.
On 14 February 1984, Motörhead served as the musical guest for The Young Ones episode "Bambi". One of the band's most popular compilations, No Remorse, followed shortly, it was released on 15 September. Campbell has since toured the world with the band and has remained a constant member of Motörhead, despite a number of changes to their line up over the years.
On 28 December 2015, band founder and sole constant member Lemmy died. The following day, drummer Mikkey Dee announced that Motörhead had disbanded, stating: "We will not be doing any more tours or anything. And there will not be any more records. But the fire survives, and Lemmy lives on in the hearts of everyone."
On February 2016 Phil Campbell entered the studio along with Slipknot percussionist Chris Fehn to record a new solo album.
Campbell resides in Pontypridd, Wales with his wife Gaynor and their three children, Todd, Dane and Tyla.
Campbell uses an LAG Explorer Signature model guitar both live and in the studio, fitted with two Seymour Duncan humbuckers and a single (volume) control. He also uses DBZ, Charvel, Caparison, a couple of Framus Custom Shop guitars on stage, with an occasional acoustic Dean. He has also been known to play ESP, PRS, Minarik Infernos and a Parker Nitefly guitars.
He also uses guitars built by luthier TC Ellis. So far, Ellis has built him a Les Paul-styled, a Stratocaster-styled, and one modeled after Lemmy's custom-built Rickenbacker 4004.
Like Lemmy, Phil uses Marshall Amplifiers and Cabinets when playing live, currently using Marshall JVM410H, JVM410H-JS, JCM 900 4100 and 1959RR heads. In the studio however he has been known to use Line 6, ENGL, Bogner and Laboga Amps. Earlier in his career he occasionally played Gallien-Krueger amplifiers.
He mainly uses Dunlop pedals (Micro Amp, Micro Chorus, Phase 90 (Script or EVH), Carbon Copy, Smart Gate, Slash Octave Fuzz & 95Q wah), strings (10–46) and picks (.88).
Motörhead official website
Motörhead official forum
Motörhead Gallery with Phil Campbell