Matthew "Matt" Helders (born 7 May 1986) is an English drummer, vocalist and songwriter. He is best known as a founding member of the indie rock band Arctic Monkeys, with whom he has recorded five studio albums.
In 2015, Helders collaborated with Iggy Pop and Queens of the Stone Age's Josh Homme and Dean Fertita to record Pop's latest studio album, Post Pop Depression (2016).
Helders has said that he ended up playing drums as "that was the only thing left. When we started the band none of us played anything. We just put it together. They all had guitars and I bought a drum kit after a bit." However, Helders has mentioned the influence rap music has had on the band, saying "We were rap fans at school more than now... it still influences us in some ways; like for me, it's the drummin'. The groove element, like foon-keh music." In addition, Helders cites seeing Queens of the Stone Age as the biggest influence on his development as a drummer, saying "the one thing that changed me the most was seeing Queens of the Stone Age live at a festival last year... as soon as they came off I was like - "Fuck, I need to start hitting harder." Helders also explained the band's insistence on singing in their native Sheffield accent, saying, "when you talk between the songs at a gig and you're speakin' English in our normal accent, it seems a bit strange when you burst into song like you're from California or something...it looks a bit daft."
In a similar fashion to other members of the band, Helders has remained true to his hometown roots, suggesting that seeing places all over the world makes him more appreciative of Sheffield, which still provides the basis for the band's lyrics. "And all around you, there's still plenty of things to write about. Touring lets you see a lot of places that you realise you wouldn't want to live in...and when you come home, it's pretty easy to slip into your old ways, to all the places you've always gone." Helders also points out that despite the fame of the band, he can still avoid being mobbed in the street – "If we all go out together at night clubbing, it's difficult, but alone you don't get recognised much." Although he continued to live at home with his parents during the band's early career, Helders has followed Cook in moving into his own house, but has nonetheless stayed in the Sheffield area, saying "we still all live in the same place we grew up. It's probably just how we were brought up. We're never going to move away to London."
The most comprehensive backing vocalist of the group, his vocals have been featured on many of the band's songs. He often sings in response to or in harmony with lead singer Alex Turner, and sings lead vocals on "D Is for Dangerous," "Brick by Brick," and "I.D.S.T.," as well as on parts of "You Probably Couldn't See for the Lights but You Were Staring Straight at Me," "Who the Fuck Are Arctic Monkeys?," and "Teddy Picker." Also, during two shows of the North American leg of the band's Humbug Tour, he sang an interpolation of Wham!'s "Last Christmas" during an encore performance of "Fluorescent Adolescent". Typically, before a performance of 'Brick by Brick' live, Alex will introduce Matt as 'That young man over there on the drumkit, Mr. Matthew J. Helders the third everyone! As if he hasn't done enough for you all already, he's gonna sing this next tune.'
In 2008, Helders remixed T.H.E.H.I.V.E.S (We Rule The World), the Hives's fourth single from The Black and White Album, and "Skin Divers," Duran Duran's second single from "Red Carpet Massacre." He played a few TV shows with We Are Scientists in the UK as well as remixing their second single "Chick Lit" as a b-side for the vinyl release. He is featured on Toddla T's album "Skanky Skanky." He also remixed "Again & Again" for Roots Manuva, which gained airplay from Zane Lowe on BBC Radio 1.
In August 2008, it was announced that Helders would compile the latest release in the LateNightTales DJ mix CD series. The set, entitled Late Night Tales: Matt Helders, was released on 27 October 2008 and included a spoken work track performed and written by bandmate Alex Turner.
On 12 June 2010 Helders (using the stage name Rufus Black) appeared on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross drumming for Diddy's Dirty Money performance of the single Hello, Good Morning.
Helders is one of 3 creators of the Tramlines Festival in Sheffield.
Helders recorded the drum tracks on Post Pop Depression, written by Iggy Pop and Josh Homme, which was released on March 18th 2016. Helders will tour with them to support the album.
Helders released his own clothing line, consisting of a jacket, a zip hood and three t-shirts. The garments went on sale in May 2007 with sales accompanied by a CD featuring an Arctic Monkeys remix by Matt himself and Supreme Being designer Skuff. One pound from each sale will go to the Arthur Rank Hospice.
Helders has been dating model Breana McDow since 2011. The couple became engaged in 2013, and married in 2015. On October 30th, 2015, their daughter, Amelia Helders was born in Los Angeles.
RCI with Premier Hardware (LUGS) Solid White and Clear Spiral
24"x18" Bass Drum
16"x16" Floor Tom
13"x8" Rack Tom
Ludwig Vistalite 14"x 4.5" Snare
Pearl Drums 2000 Series
X2 Snare Stand (one for Tom and one for snare)
Drum Workshop 9000 Hardware
Bass drum pedal
9500 Hi Hat stand
X2 9710 Straight Cymbal Stand
Evans Drumheads
Snare Evans EC Coated
EC2 Clear Toms
EMAD2 Bass Drum Head
Zildjian
14" K Mastersound Hi-Hats
18" K Dark Medium Thin Crash
22" K Light Ride
Vater Drumsticks
3a Fatback
1971 Ludwig Black Bowling Ball Wrap
22x14 Kick Drum
13x9 Tom Rack
16x16 Floor Tom
Ludwig 402 Snare
During the 2009 Humbug Tour, Helders' bass drum head had the words "Agile Beast" displayed on it. This was done in similar fashion with the word "Missing" during parts of the Suck It and See Tour. In 2013 the number '0114' was displayed on his bass drum head, the phone area code for Matt's hometown Sheffield.
Albums
Late Night Tales: Matt Helders (2008)
Singles
"Dreamer" (featuring Nesreen Shah) (2008)
As featured performer
Mongrel – "Barcode" (featuring Pariz 1, Tor Cesay, Mpho, Saul Williams and Matt Helders) (2008)
Mongrel – "The Menace" (featuring Lowkey and Matt Helders) (2008)
Toddla T – "Boom Dj From The Steel City" (2009)
Toddla T – "Better" (2009)
Iggy Pop – "Post Pop Depression" (2016)
The Last Shadow Puppets – "Everything You've Come to Expect" (2016)
Remixes
The Hives – "We Rule The World (T.H.E.H.I.V.E.S.)" (2008)
We Are Scientists – "Chick Lit" (2008)
Roots Manuva – "Again & Again" (2008)
Duran Duran – "Skin Divers" (2008)
Yo Majesty – "Club Action" (2009)
Wet Nuns – "Don't Wanna See Your Face" (2011)
