Ego Trippin' is the ninth studio album by American rapper Snoop Dogg; it was released by Geffen Records on March 11, 2008. The album debuted at number 3 on the US Billboard 200, selling 137,000 copies in its first week. Upon its release, the album received generally positive reviews from music critics.
The album was originally set to feature no guests and showcase Snoop Dogg only, hence the title "Ego Trippin'". However, Snoop Dogg proved this concept untrue as he scheduled tracks with the likes of Charlie Wilson, among others. All of the photography was taken at Long Beach Polytechnic High School, Snoop's high school.
Snoop Dogg originally confirmed that Pharrell, Nelly and Charlie Wilson would appear on a track entitled "Feet Don't Fail Me Now", and that he also would like to work with Bono, Madonna and Mick Jagger as well. However, "Feet Don't Fail Me Now" and none of the collaborations would make the final album cut except for Charlie Wilson's features. Collaborations with DJ Quik, Raphael Saadiq, Teddy Riley and Too Short were also scheduled for the album. Snoop Dogg formed a production supergroup for the album called "QDT" (Quik-Dogg-Teddy).
Snoop Dogg spoke on working with Everlast for a country song called "Johnny Cash". However, the track's title was changed to "My Medicine" with Everlast playing the guitar. Another track with Charlie Wilson and The Gap Band called "Can't Say Goodbye" was also confirmed for the album. Snoop Dogg reminisced on the track stating, "This song makes me want to cry every time I hear it. It is a reflection of my life and how I have grown as not only an artist but also a man - it is about me staying true to where I came from while having to accept where I am in my life today, it's deep".
Snoop Dogg and Charlie Wilson both performed 'Can't Say Goodbye' on American Idol's 'Idol Gives Back' Charity Performance. On July 29, 2008 BET's 106 & Park premiered Snoop Dogg's video for "Those Gurlz".
Rolling Stone said, "[H]is languorous rapping has a way of inspiring inventively freaky sounds from producers... Result: the best Snoop disc in years."
Entertainment Weekly said, "All of Snoop's personalities make appearances on his ninth CD, Ego Trippin'....It's sentimental, it's fun... Maybe this old Dogg doesn't need any new tricks." Vibe said, "Lead single 'Sensual Seduction' is an undeniable masterpiece of throwback funk."
The album sold over 137,000 copies in its first week in the United States, debuting at number 3 on the US Billboard 200 chart. In its second week the album fell to number 7 on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 57,000 copies, for a two-week total of 194,000 units. Ego Trippin' was the tenth best selling hip hop album of the year, selling 401,000 copies in the US.
Notes
"A Word Witchya!" samples "Distant Lover" performed by Marvin Gaye
"Press Play" samples "Voyage to Atlantis" performed by The Isley Brothers
"Cool" is a cover of The Time's song "Cool"
"Sets Up" samples "Hola' Hovito" performed by Jay-Z
"Deez Hollywood Nights" samples "Hollywood Knights" performed by Brooklyn Dreams
"My Medicine" samples "Jack Be Nimble performed by Traditional Folk
"Those Girls" samples "Too Much Heaven" performed by The Bee Gees
"One Chance (Make it Good)" samples "Make It Good" performed by Prince Philip Mitchell
"Why Did You Leave Me" samples "Celtic Rain" performed by Mike Oldfield
Credits adapted from Allmusic.
