Impact Is Imminent is the fourth album by thrash metal band Exodus, released in 1990. Impact Is Imminent was Exodus' first album on Capitol Records as well as their first album to feature John Tempesta on drums, and their last to feature Rob McKillop on bass, though he appeared on their first live album, Good Friendly Violent Fun, which was recorded live in 1989 but not released until 1991. It was re-released in 2008 in a limited edition mini-album packaging to resemble the original vinyl release, including the inner sleeve.
Impact Is Imminent received a negative review from Allmusic's Eduardo Rivadavia, who awarded the album one-and-a-half stars out of five and called it "the most forgettable album of Exodus' career."
Despite being released on a major label, Impact Is Imminent was not as successful as Fabulous Disaster and debuted at #137 on the Billboard 200, Exodus' lowest chart position to date. Impact Is Imminent would be Exodus' last album to enter the Billboard 200, until 2014's Blood In, Blood Out. Although Gary Holt expressed his dislike for the album during the making of Exhibit B: The Human Condition, saying, "If there was one album I could have back and record again it would be Impact"., he praised it for having "some of the best riffs I've ever written".
Exodus spent the latter half of 1990 touring in support of Impact Is Imminent. The band opened for alternative rock act Red Hot Chili Peppers (who were labelmates with Exodus at the time) at The Kaiser Center in Oakland on July 21, 1990. Exodus was part of two major tours: in August 1990, they toured the U.S. with Suicidal Tendencies and Pantera (who had just released the most successful records of their careers - Lights...Camera...Revolution! and Cowboys from Hell), and three months later, they toured Europe with Flotsam and Jetsam, Vio-Lence and Forbidden. Exodus wrapped up the tour on December 28, 1990 at The Fillmore.
All music composed by Gary Holt.
Steve "Zetro" Souza - vocals
Gary Holt - lead and rhythm guitars
Rick Hunolt - lead and rhythm guitars
Rob McKillop - bass
John Tempesta - drums
Recorded at Music Grinder and Record Two Mendocino Studios
Additional recording at Alpha & Omega, The Plant, and Earwax Studios
Produced by The H-Team
Recorded by Csaba Petocz
Mixed by Marc Senesac at Alpha & Omega
Additional engineering by John Bush, Lewis Demetri, Chris Fuhrman, Andy Newell, and Jim McKee
Assistant engineered by Steve Heinke, Lawrence Ethan, Shawna Stobie, Ulrich Wild, Casey McMackin, and Manny Lacarrubba
Mastered by Stephen Marcussen at Precision Mastering
Billboard (North America)
