Amy Jo Johnson (born October 6, 1970) is an American actress best known for her roles in Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, Felicity, The Division, and Flashpoint.
Johnson came to prominence in the mid 1990s as part of the original Power Rangers cast. After leaving the show, she had several parts in made-for-television movies before landing a leading role in Felicity on The WB, which ran from 1998-2000. In the 2000s, she continued her acting career, with main roles in The Division and Flashpoint, as well as recurring and guest roles on several other shows.
Johnson is also a singer-songwriter and has released three albums to date.
Johnson was born in Dennis, Massachusetts, on Cape Cod, to Greig, a car salesman, and Christine, who managed a clothing store. She attended Dennis-Yarmouth Regional High School.
As a teenager, Johnson participated in gymnastics. She reached Class One and participated in competitions hosted in the United States and Europe in uneven bars, vault, beam, and floor. At the age of 17, she left gymnastics to pursue acting.
Johnson is married to Olivier Giner (August 2009). They live in Toronto and have one daughter, Francesca Christine, born in December 2008.
Johnson moved to New York City at 18 to pursue an acting career. She attended the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute and the American Musical and Acting Academy. She later moved to Los Angeles to audition for her first part.
Johnson's first role was as Kimberly Ann Hart, the Pink Ranger, in the 1993 series Mighty Morphin Power Rangers. She acquired the role less than a month after moving to Los Angeles. Her gymnastics background was an advantage in fight scenes. The series achieved unexpected success, and Johnson had a fair share of media exposure. In an appearance on VH1's I Love the '90s, Johnson jokingly stated that having been the Pink Power Ranger was something she would "never live down." In later years, Johnson revealed that becoming famous from the show was at times overwhelming and had given her nightmares but that overall, she learned many things and was grateful to the show and her fans.
After she left the series in 1995, Johnson went on to star in Disney Channel's Susie Q and in the Saved by the Bell: The New Class episode "Backstage Pass." In 1997, she starred in NBC's adaptation of Lois Duncan's novel Killing Mr. Griffin and played a gymnast with an eating disorder in Perfect Body. Johnson also participated in the film Without Limits. She also reprised her role as Kimberly Hart in Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie.
In 1998, Johnson was invited to play Julie Emrick in The WB series Felicity. She held a main role on Felicity for three seasons and was a special guest in its fourth and final season.
In the early 2000s, Johnson had roles in Interstate 60, Pursuit of Happiness, and Infested, as well as television film Hard Ground. She also had guest starring roles on Spin City and ER. In 2004, she starred as Stacy Reynolds in the fourth season of The Division. In the latter half of the decade, she had recurring roles in Wildfire and What About Brian, and she starred in television films Magma: Volcanic Disaster on Syfy and Fatal Trust on Lifetime. In addition, Johnson took parts in a few independent films: Veritas, Prince of Truth and Islander.
Beginning in 2008, Johnson became a series regular on Flashpoint as Constable Jules Callaghan, a member of the fictional Strategic Response Unit of the Toronto Police service. She was nominated for a Gemini Award for her performance. The show aired new episodes through 2012.
Since 2012, Johnson has had guest roles on a few shows including a recurring role on USA's Covert Affairs. In addition, she has directed and produced two short films, Bent and Lines.
Johnson is a singer-songwriter and has released three albums: The Trans-American Treatment (2001), Imperfect (2005), and Never Broken (2013). She has performed in the Los Angeles area with The Amy Jo Johnson Band. In December 2007, she contributed guest vocals to Koishii & Hush's cover of The Cars track "Since You're Gone", which was released as a single.
Some of Johnson's music has been featured on television shows. Johnson's character in Felicity was originally described as a dancer, but with Johnson's input, the producers rewrote the character as a singer and guitarist. As a result, Johnson was able to perform her own song, "Puddle of Grace," on the show. In Flashpoint, her songs "Dancing In-Between" and "Goodbye" were featured.
Among other notable recognitions, Johnson received a nomination for Best Performance by an Actress in a Continuing Leading Dramatic Role at the 24th Annual Gemini Awards in 2009. She also received two nominations as Best Actress for her role in Flashpoint at the Monte Carlo TV Festival. 
The Trans-American Treatment (2001)
Imperfect (2005)
Never Broken (2013)
Felicity (soundtrack) (1999)
Sweetwater (soundtrack) (2000)
Since You're Gone (EP) (2007)
Souvenirs (2008)
