Psychopathic Records, also known as "The Hatchet", is an American independent record label based in Farmington Hills, Michigan that specializes in hip hop music. The label was founded in 1991 by Alex Abbiss and hip hop group Insane Clown Posse. The iconography of a man with a hatchet has been used for years as a symbol of the group, its fanbase, and its associates.
In addition to producing music, Psychopathic also produces merchandise, video, and professional wrestling. Psychopathic runs its own manufacturing and distribution operations for merchandise, with nearly 30 full-time employees. The label has an average of $10 million in revenue per year. The recording studio for the label is called The Lotus Pod.
Following the release of their 1991 EP Bass-Ment Cuts, Detroit hip hop trio Inner City Posse, consisting of Violent J, Shaggy 2 Dope, and John Kickjazz (John Utsler), hired local record store owner Alex Abbiss as its manager. Taking the advice of Violent J's brother, Jumpsteady, the group and Abbiss agreed to create their own label. After debating between the names Mad Paperboy Records and Psychopathic Records, they decided on Psychopathic and the label soon started operation out of Abbiss's mother's basement. A drawing Joseph Utsler scribbled on a napkin, now known as the Hatchetman, became the company's logo.
Inner City Posse released their first professionally recorded album, Dog Beats, on the label later that year. Shortly after, the group underwent a change in style, look, and name to become Insane Clown Posse, and created the Dark Carnival concept that would be continued by much of the label's other artists for years to come. Esham and Kid Rock were paid to appear on the debut "Insane Clown Posse" album to increase the album's marketability. The group and their label began to gain moderate popularity in the Detroit area following the releases of Carnival of Carnage and Beverly Kills 50187, as well as through their extensive amount of independent promoting. After carnival of carnage John Kickjazz left the group and was replaced for a short time by another member on "Beverly Kills 50187" named Gree-Z". After that record he then left the group and the trio has now stayed a duo.
Mike E. Clark was selected as the label's core producer, with his recording studio The Fun House being the main studio. On March 8, 1994, Insane Clown Posse released Ringmaster, which sold 40,000 copies independently by the summer. Later that year, Project Born was the first outside act signed to Psychopathic Records with the belief that they would become "the next Dayton Family". The group's debut album, Project Born Dead, received minimal sales, and they were subsequently dropped from the label in 1995.
Insane Clown Posse signed a record deal with Battery/Jive Records in 1995, but left the label the following year after it poorly promoted their new album, the Riddle Box. One day after the group left Jive and one day before it signed with Hollywood Records, Insane Clown Posse released Tunnel of Love on its Psychopathic label. The group released The Great Milenko in 1997, but were notified that Hollywood Records had deleted the album within hours of its release, despite having sold 18,000 copies and reaching number 63 on the Billboard 200. The removal caused a public controversy, creating major mainstream coverage of the group and their Psychopathic label.
In 1997, the label signed Myzery, former members of the House of Krazees Jamie Spaniolo and Paul Methric, and in 1998 they signed Blaze Ya Dead Homie. Taking the name of Twiztid, Spaniolo and Methric created the identities of Jamie Madrox and Monoxide Child, and released their first album, Mostasteless, that year. Insane Clown Posse, Twiztid, Myzery, and Blaze also formed the supergroup Psychopathic Rydas, and created Joe & Joey Records to release the group's albums to avoid any lawsuits. Myzery soon left the label after releasing the EP Para La Isla.
Later that year, Island Records bought the rights of The Great Milenko from Hollywood Records, and signed Insane Clown Posse and Twiztid to their label. Island also helped Psychopathic Records expand into the movie business by funding Insane Clown Posse US$250,000 to begin work on a full-length movie, Big Money Hustlas, written by Violent J. The film was released through Island Def Jam Music Group, Psychopathic Video, and Non-Homogenized Productions on July 18, 2000. In 2001 they were the first record label/music group to do a tour showing their own movie in concert venues across the US.
Following their success in WWF, WCW, and ECW, Insane Clown Posse founded the professional wrestling promotion Juggalo Championship Wrestling in 1999 and created the Psychopathic Sports department. In July 2000, Psychopathic Records staged the first annual Gathering of the Juggalos at the Novi Expo Center in Novi, Michigan. Described by Bruce as a "Juggalo Woodstock", the Gathering of the Juggalos drew over 7,000 people to Novi, Michigan for the 2 day event. Both Insane Clown Posse and Twiztid permanently returned to Psychopathic later that year, and the label soon built its own recording studio, named The Lotus Pod. Twiztid released the album Freek Show, which debuted number 51 on Billboard 200.
In 2001, the supergroup Dark Lotus debuted, consisting of Jamie Madrox, Monoxide Child, Violent J, Shaggy 2 Dope, Blaze Ya Dead Homie, and non-Psychopathic artist Marz. Later that year, Anybody Killa was signed to the label. While also working on his own album, Hatchet Warrior, Killa replaced Marz in Dark Lotus for a short period. Detroit rapper Esham , whom Violent J considered to be an influence, also signed with Psychopathic Records for a large contract, and released a greatest hits album, Acid Rain, the following year.
Jumpsteady released his debut EP Chaos Theory in 2002. At that year's Gathering of the Juggalos, rapper V-Sinizter won an MC Contest and was awarded a one-year contract with Psychopathic Records. On November 5, Insane Clown Posse released their sixth Joker's Card, The Wraith: Shangri-La, which debuted at number 15 on the Billboard 200. V-Sinizter released Hunting Season in 2003, but was soon released by the label due to minimal sale.
Later that year, alternative rock group Zug Izland was signed and quickly released Cracked Tiles on January 28, 2003. They released their last album on the label titled 3:33 on June 1, 2004. The label closed after Zug Izland left.
After releasing Master of the Flying Guillotine in 2005, Jumpsteady retired from music to become an EMT in the metro Detroit area.
That summer, the two supergroups Soopa Villainz and Drive-By were created. The first, consisting of Mr. Diamond (Violent J), Mr. Club (Shaggy 2 Dope), Mr. Spade (Esham), and Mr. Heart (Lavel), released Furious in August. The latter, consisting of Blaze and Anybody Killa, released Pony Down (Prelude) in October. Although Esham had achieved his highest level of success at Psychopathic, he left the label that month to reform his own label, Reel Life Productions, and the group Soopa Villainz was disbanded. Anybody Killa left the following February. Later that year, Psychopathic Records and hip hop group D12, representing Eminem, ended their rivalry by holding a bowling match.
In April, Axe Murder Boyz won a single album contract with Psychopathic Records and released Blood In, Blood Out before being released from the label. That June, Alex Abbiss announced his retirement. Long time body guard and friend of Insane Clown Posse William Dail, referred to as Billy Bill, was named new President and CEO of Psychopathic Records. Later that month, the label launched its own internet radio station called WFuckOff Radio. Boondox signed with the label at that year's Gathering of the Juggalos, becoming the first southern rapper on the label. Boondox was a psychopathic records favorite in the Underground Psychos contest who was voted out by the jugglaos in the second round. His named in the contest was "turn coat dirty".
In 2007, the third former member of "House of Krazees" The R.O.C. signed with newly created Psychopathic sub-label, Hatchet House.
In 2008, Anybody Killa re-signed with Psychopathic. That May, the label hosted the first annual "Hatchet Attacks". Axe Murder Boyz signed with Hatchet House on August 22. At the 2008 Gathering of the Juggalos a documentary on Juggalos, entitled A Family Underground, was filmed and was released on May 12, 2009.
On February 17, 2010, Psychopathic Records signed a contract with Universal Music Group's Fontana Distribution. During this period, the label was nominated for Outstanding Local Record Label by Detroit Music Awards. In Blaze's Gang Rags album The Dayton Family was shown to appear courtesy of Hatchet House.
Vanilla Ice and Cold 187um signed with Psychopathic Records in 2011.
On January 3, 2012, WFuckOff Radio was rebranded as Psychopathic Radio. During the 2012 Gathering of the Juggalos, it was announced that both former acts Zug Izland & Jumpsteady have returned to Psychopathic Records. Boondox and Twiztid left the label. The December 21, 2012 issue of Hatchet Herald indicates that two new artists will issue albums on the label in 2013.
On February 4, 2013, it was revealed that one of the new artists was Legz Diamond. An entire issue of Hatchet Herald was devoted to the guitarist, discussing his Psychopathic debut album, 9 Pistolas. In March, Violent J commented on Twiztid's departure revealing that there was no animosity between Twiztid and Psychopathic, and speculated that Blaze Ya Dead Homie had also left the label, but that Twiztid and Blaze were still a part of Dark Lotus and Psychopathic Rydas. Blaze later spoke openly about the subject during a concert, stating that he had not departed from Psychopathic. Insane Clown Posse publicly apologized to Blaze via Twitter for the misunderstanding.
Doe Dubbla, a rapper from Detroit, officially signed to Psychopathic in June 2013, under the alias Big Hoodoo. In July, Psychopathic released Big Hoodoo's debut, Crystal Skull, Cold 187 um departed from the label At the 2013 Gathering of the Juggalos, it was confirmed that Axe Murder Boyz and Boondox are returning to Psychopathic, while Blaze Ya Dead Homie ended up leaving Psychopathic Records.
A former employee is suing the label for sexual harassment.
In early February 2014 Faygoluvers.net conducted an interview with Insane Clown Posse, and they said that they hope they will work with some artists that they have been wanting to work with for a while. Also they were asked if they were going to do the second leg of The Mighty Death Pop! Tour, and they said that they will go on tour in 2014 but it won't be called The Mighty Death Pop! Tour. During an interview in March 2014 DJ Paul of Da Mafia 6ix announced that they will be doing a collaboration album with Insane Clown Posse, and will tour to promote the album. In June 2014 Psychopathic Records announced that Insane Clown Posse and Da Mafia 6ix were working on a collaboration album, and Insane Clown Posse posted pictures on their official instagram page of them and Da Mafia 6ix sitting around in Violent J's home studio. The album is scheduled to be released sometime in August 2014. A few days after Faygoluvers.net conducted the interview with Insane Clown Posse, Psychopathic Records, Insane Clown Posse, Twiztid and Blaze Ya Dead Homie released a picture of the Dark Lotus hand sign stating that all original members (Insane Clown Posse, Twiztid & Blaze Ya Dead Homie) were going to be back in the studio recording a new studio album on all their media outlets. Under the hand sign were Roman numerals translating to (7-29-2014). The album will initially be released at the 2014 GOTJ (7/23/2014 - 7/27/2014). In June 2014 Insane Clown Posse announced that they will be releasing their first box set The First Six with all first six Joker Cards (Carnival of Carnage, Ringmaster, Riddle Box, The Great Milenko, The Amazing Jeckel Brothers, The Wraith: Shangri-La/The Wraith: Hell's Pit), along with a certification of authenticity signed by Violent J & Shaggy 2 Dope, 6 tarot cards, and an 8 song EP of all new music titled House of Wax, that will be released on October 28, 2014. In a July 6, 2014 interview Faygoluvers.net conducted with Jumpsteady, he stated that Psychopathic is currently working with some new supergroups. At the 2014 GOTJ during Anybody Killa's seminar, it was announced that he and Big Hoodoo have created a new group called The Have Nots. Insane Clown Posse have composed a group with Da Mafia 6ix called The Killjoy Club, and will be releasing their debut album titled Reindeer Games on September 2, 2014. ICP, DM6, Madchild, Jelly Roll and Mushroom Head plus others are to go on tour possibly titled "ShockFest" which will run from September 18, 2014 - October 31, 2014. ICP finally announced that they will release a Psypher featuring artists that are not signed to Psychopathic Records sometime before Hallowicked, including Madchild. Also announced Otis of AMB and DJ Paul will both release solo albums on Psychopathic records in 2015. On August 5, 2014 ICP released a promo flyer for their upcoming tour titled "ShockFest" with Da Mafia 6ix, Mushroomhead, Madchild and Jelly Roll from September 30, 2014 through October 31, 2014. The tour was originally scheduled to be a 45 date tour, and scheduled to kick off on September 18, 2014, but due to Madchild performing in Australia with his group Swollen Members for a mini tour until September 27, 2014, the tour will now kick off on September 30, 2014 Columbus, Ohio and will conclude on ICP's 21st annual Hallowicked concert on October 31, 2014 in Detroit, Michigan. Psychopathic Records released a video promo for "ShockFest" in early August 2014. The tour is now scheduled to run from September 25, 2014 in Grand Rapids, Michigan and will conclude on October 31, 2014 in Detroit, Michigan. In the booklet released with the Reindeer Games album were four flyers in promotion of new albums. The first was for Insane Clown Posse, it said that the 3rd Joker Card in the 2nd Deck will be released "sooner than you think". The second was for Otis, it said that his debut solo album on Psychopathic will be titled Slaughter and it said that it too will be released "soon". The third was for DJ Paul, it said that his debut solo album on Psychopathic will be titled Master Of Evil and it said that it too will be released "soon". The fourth was for Da Mafia 6ix, it was for their upcoming album titled "Watch What U Wish" which will be released on October 31, 2014 not on Psychopathic Records. In early October 2014 it was announced that "Watch What U Wish" will be pushed back to a 2015 release creating speculation that Psychopathic will release the album. Instead DM6 will release a mixxtape titled Hear Some Evil in October 2014. The First Six was initially scheduled to be released on October 28, 2014, but after a minor setback it is now scheduled to be released on November 25, 2014. At the 2014 20th Hallowicked Anniversary, ICP revealed the 3rd Joker Card in the 2nd Deck which is broken up in to two parts, The Missing Link: Lost which will be released on Violent J's 43rd bday, April 28, 2015, and The Missing Link: Found will be released July 28, 2014. On December 6, 2014, at the show in Topeka, Kansas, Tha Hav Knots a group composed of Anybody Killa and Big Hoodoo released their first ever debut track titled "Happy Wicked Holiday" a Christmas themed single. During ABK's set during the tour they opened with their first official song titled "Don't Stop", no studio version of the song has been released, and ended with "Happy Wicked Holiday".
Psychopathic Records artist Boondox will be going on tour with Majik Ninja Entertainment artist Blaze Ya Dead Homie on MNE's first tour and the first "Psychopathic/Majik Ninja Entertainmen Tour" titled "Back From The Dead Tour", which kicks off February 14, 2015 which coincides with Twiztid's "My Bloody Valentine Show". In the booklet for Insane Clown Posse's The Marvelous Missing Link: Lost it was announced that Otis's debut solo album titled Slaughter will be released September 1, 2015. The second "Psychopathic Records/Majik Ninja Entertainment Tour" will be with Boondox from Psychopathic Records, and former Psychopathic Records artist Blaze Ya Dead Homie from Majik Ninja Entertainment. It will also be Majik Ninja Entertainment's third tour, and their first in Australia. The tour will take place in Australia, and will be called "The Underground Assault Tour" and will feature Australian rapper KidCrusher. The tour will take place June 25, 2015 through June 28, 2015. The third "Psychopathic Records/Majik Ninja Entertainment Tour" will take place in the Fall of 2015 with Twiztid, Blaze Ya Dead Homie, Boondox, Prozak, Wolfpac and Scum, the tour is titled "Welcome To The Underground Tour". On July 24, 2015 during ICP's GOTJ seminar it was announced that Boondox had left the label to sign with Majik Ninja Entertainment, which turned out to be a false flag as Boondox has chosen to branch out on his own.
On February 21, 2016 in celebration of the Juggalo Day Show ICP released the dates for their "20th Anniversary: Riddle Box Tour". The tour is scheduled to kick off on May 5, 2016 and will conclude on June 18, 2016. On April 8, 2016 ICP released their tour dates for their Canada tour. The tour is scheduled to kick off on June 25, 2016 and will conclude on July 17, 2016, just in time for the GOTJ, which starts on July 20, 2016. In an early April 2016 Faygoluvers.net interview with Violent J, J said that the possible acts being talked about for Riddle Box Tour are: Esham, Project Born, The Dayton Family, and Young Wicked. Also stated was that he and Shaggy are working on their solo albums. In the same interview it was announced that Young Wicked has a new project revolving around him coming out soon. On April 25, 2016 via Twitter, Young Wicked announced that he is on the "20th Anniversary: Riddle Box Tour". It was also announced via The 17th annual Gathering Of The Juggalos infomercial that the label has a new artist that they will be announcing at Gathering 17 along with a new six song EP from this new "discovery" that will be available at the event. Also it was stated that many people will find out what group they used to rap with and who they used to go by. ICP will go on their first Canadian Tour for the first time in 13 years. The tour is scheduled to kick off on June 24, 2016 at the Canadian Rockfest, and concluded on July 17, 2016.
Psychopathic Records began distribution of merchandise in 1994 by selling T-shirts. After several comic books drawn by Joseph Utlser sold quickly in 1994, the label also started manufacturing collectibles. Psychopathic later created a separate department for their merchandising and called their line Hatchet Gear, named after the label's Hatchetman logo which more closely resembles a traditional meat cleaver. Hatchetgear currently sells everything from T-shirts, jerseys, and hoodies to "energy drinks, action figures, ski masks, liquor flasks, jewelry, and sneakers." The range and marketability of their merchandise has become an aspect of the company.
Psychopathic Video has released 6 professional wrestling videos, 5 concert films, 5 documentaries, 1 mockumentary, 1 mini-movie, 1 collection of music videos, and 2 feature films. On August 31, 2004, Psychopathic Video made world history when it released the mini-movie Bowling Balls with Insane Clown Posse's album Hell's Pit. The video was the first ever 3-D film shot in high-definition.
Psychopathic Sports was launched in 1997 when Insane Clown Posse released a VHS entitled ICP's Strangle-Mania, which featured a compilation of professional wrestling death matches from the Outrageously Violent Wrestling from Japan video collection, overdubbed with their own humorous commentary. It hosted two Strangle-Mania Live wrestling events in 1997 and 1998. With Juggalo Championship Wrestling's inception in 1999, Psychopathic Sports turned its full focus to the promotion. In 2007, it started the SlamTV! internet wrestling show, as well as the SlamTV! Express mini-show in 2010. Psychopathic Sports also promoted the debut house show for TNA Wrestling on March 17, 2006 in Plymouth, Michigan.
The department expanded in January 2010, announcing that it had bought a warehouse to run operations in Novi, Michigan and had hired full-time workers. They also announced plans to run Juggalo Championship Wrestling full-time starting November of that year. The promotion will hold tapings of SlamTV! every other week, as well as run one additional show a month, at the Juggalo Arena. All shows will be taped and released on DVD, and a clothing line is set to be created.
Psychopathic Records holds several annual events throughout the year that feature performances by the entire label, sometimes referred to as the Psychopathic Family or Hatchet Family. In 2008, the label hosted the first "Hatchet Attacks," which occurs in the first half of each year and features performances by the entire label and JCW wrestling. Since 2000, it has been hosting the Gathering of the Juggalos, an event that spans four days throughout August. It features over 100 bands, professional wrestling, and various party activities. Within the week of Christmas, Psychopathic hosts "Big Ballas X-Mas Party." Along with JCW wrestling and guest performers, the final act consists of the entire Psychopathic label performing together, known specifically as the Deadly Medley.
Behind the Paint by Violent J with Hobey Echlin (2003)
Another Decade Down by Violent J (2014/2015)
The first Psychopathic Psypher was released in 2011 and featured: Violent J, Jamie Madrox, Anybody Killa and Bootleg, with music done by DJ Clay.
The second Psychopathic Psypher was released a few months later in 2011 and featured: Shaggy 2 Dope, Monoxide Child, Blaze Ya Dead Homie, Boondox and Shoestring, with music done by DJ Clay.
The third Psychopathic Psypher was released in early 2012 and featured: Insane Clown Posse, Twiztid, Drive-By and Cold 187um, with music done by DJ Clay.
The fourth Psychopathic Psypher was released in mid 2012 and featured: Insane Clown Posse, House of Krazees, Drive-By, Cold 187um, Legz Diamond and Doe Dubbla (who would later sign to Psychopathic Records as Big Hoodoo), with music done by DJ Clay.
It was announced during ICP's 2014 GOTJ seminar that they will be doing another Psypher, this time featuring artists who are not on the label. ICP threw out a name to see the fans' response, and it was then confirmed that Swollen Members artist and solo artist Madchild would be featured on the Psypher. ICP said that it should be out sometime before Halloween 2014.
In mid 2015 ICP announced that they will be holding a contest at the 2015 GOTJ and that the top four winners will be featured on the 5th Psypher. On September 9, 2015, Thomas "Cannibal" Cottingham, the winner of the 2015 GOTJ Psypher Contest was killed saving a woman and her baby.
In the infomercial for the 2016 Gathering of the Juggalos it was announced that the Psychopathic Psypher 5 would be performed live on July 20, 2016 on the Big Top Stage.
During ICP's GOTJ 2012 seminar it was announced that the first Juggalo Day Show would be held on February 17, 2013 at St. Andrew's Hall in Detroit, Michigan. The show featured performances by Project Born, Myzery and Insane Clown Posse.
During ICP's 2013 GOTJ seminar it was announced that the upcoming Juggalo Day Show would be "The Great Milenko". The show was held February 17, 2014, at the Newport Music Hall in Columbus, Ohio. The show featured performances by Downtown Brown, ClaAs, Big Hoodoo and Insane Clown Posse.
During ICP's GOTJ 2014 seminar they announced that they would turn "Juggalo Day" into a weekend event. The first night, February 20, 2015 the movies Big Money Hustlas and Big Money Rustlas. The next night, February 21, 2015 the "Take Me Home" show was held at the Masonic Temple in Detroit, Michigan. The show featured performances by Trick Trick, Big Hoodoo, Anybody Killa and Insane Clown Posse.
During ICP's 2015 GOTJ seminar it was said that they would do the Ringmaster. The places being considered are Worcester, Massachusetts, Dallas, Texas and Detroit, Michigan. Confirmed during 2015 Hallowicked, it was announced it would be held February 19 and February 20. The 19th would be held at St. Andrews in Detroit, MI, with a full show of JCW and the first ever live concert of The Killjoy Club. The 20th would have Esham returning and the main event of Insane Clown Posse doing a live concert of The Ringmaster from beginning to end. Special guests are said to be announced at insaneclownposse.com. The first night consisted sets from Tha Hav Knots (Anybody Killa, Big Hoodoo, Bonez Dubb), Lil Wyte, Mastamind, DJ Yella, Lil Eazy E and The Killjoy Club (ICP, DM6, Young Wicked). The second night featured sets from Molly Gruesome, Swag Toof, King 810, Young Wicked, Mushroomhead, Esham, Twiztid (surprise guest) (songs: 2nd Hand Smoke, Mutant X, We Don't Die, Different, Rock The Dead), and Insane Clown Posse with Mike E. Clark on the turntables.
