Brandon Charles Boyd (born February 15, 1976) is an American singer, songwriter, musician, author, and visual artist. He is best known as the lead vocalist of the American Multi-Platinum rock band Incubus.
Boyd graduated from Calabasas High School in 1994 and attended Moorpark College for two years before committing to Incubus. Brandon grew up in Calabasas, CA with Ricky Taylor who inspired him to write music. His parents, Priscilla "Dolly" Wiseman and Charles Boyd, both of whom had experience in entertainment, had nurtured his artistic side since he was a child. Other musical family members include his younger brother, Jason Boyd, the former lead singer of the band Audiovent, cousin Sam Boyd, a songwriter and touring musician, as well as cousin Berto Boyd, an accomplished Flamenco guitarist. In an interview, Brandon explained that he had "yet to stumble across his best work" because he lacked the ability to read music.
Boyd designed concert fliers advertising their early performances. At first, Boyd had copied several drawings from a sex education book that Einziger's mother had given them, but he decided to stop using it after several prospective fans had been confused by their fliers ("What kind of band is this?"). So the band had to retreat back to using their own artwork. He is known for having some guitar parts during live performances. Boyd is also known for bringing interesting instruments into his songs, such as the didgeridoo and djembe. 
His voice was part of what enticed Sony's Epic/Immortal Records, along with their self released album Fungus Amongus and the band was signed in 1996. The band's first two releases on the label, Enjoy Incubus and S.C.I.E.N.C.E. went largely unnoticed, but subsequent releases Make Yourself and Morning View were commercial successes. The band's 2004 release A Crow Left of the Murder... has continued their success, nominating the band for Best Hard Rock Performance in the 2005 Grammy Awards. On November 28, 2006, the band released Light Grenades. On June 16, 2009, Incubus released a greatest hits album titled Monuments and Melodies.
In 2011 Incubus finished their seventh studio album If Not Now, When?, which was released on July 12, 2011, followed then by a tour.
On December 13, 2014 they performed their upcoming single entitled "Trust Fall" at KROQ. They announced the release of two EP's in 2015 with the first, Trust Fall, scheduled for March 24, 2015. On February 5, 2015, the single "Absolution Calling" was released.
Brandon Boyd has written three books. The first, written in 2003, was White Fluffy Clouds: Found Inspiration Moving Forward. It was published by Endophasia Publications and mainly consists of his artwork, photography, song lyrics from Incubus, and additional writings and thoughts. His more recent publications include, From the Murks of the Sultry Abyss, was also published by Endophasia in 2007 and "So The Echo"  which was published in January 2013 and consists of his artwork from the past 5 years.
"So The Echo" visually weaves the last five years Boyd spent honing his craft and talents, both in his music and art. He took part in many different group and solo art shows and he used his artwork as a means for environmental activism. 
In recent years, Brandon Boyd has focused on making fine art, specifically painting, and on September 8, 2008 celebrated the opening of his first solo show, titled "Ectoplasm," at Mr. Musichead Gallery in Los Angeles, California.
In the Spring of 2011, Boyd used his creativity and artistic skills to make a large mural, at the Hurley Space Gallery, in order to raise awareness about single use plastics and their harmful effects on the world's oceans. 
A firm believer in the opportunity to “give back”, Brandon is involved with many organizations and charitable causes, and in 2003 along with his Incubus band mates, founded the 501(c)(3) non-profit organization, ‘The Make Yourself Foundation’, which has raised over 1.4 million dollars for various philanthropic causes both locally and globally.  Through this organization, the band has raised over $2,000,000 with the help of their fans donating money world wide and with this money the organization has awarded grant funding to over 60 nonprofit organizations. Another thing that this organization often does is it will provide its fans chances to have wonderful, and otherwise unattainable experiences, and to meet and spend time with Incubus. Most recently two fans were flown to the ancient Mayan ruins at Tikal National Park and were able to do this with the band. A list of organizations which 'The Make Yourself Foundation' has given grants to can be found here. Brandon is quoted on 'The Make Yourself Foundation' website saying, "Sometimes I have to pinch myself that we are in the position we are in; to be able to nudge change through music and smiles! Not forced or intimidated into action, but welcomed and invited. Blessed!" 
Boyd was selected to play the role of Judas Iscariot for the North American arena tour of Andrew Lloyd Webber's rock opera Jesus Christ Superstar. He was to play the role starting June 9 through August 17. He was to be joined by Superstar winner Ben Forster as Jesus, Destiny's Child singer Michelle Williams as Mary Magdalene, former 'N Sync singer JC Chasez as Pilate, and former Sex Pistols and Public Image Ltd lead singer John Lydon as King Herod. On May 31, the tour was canceled due to poor ticket sales.
On July 6, 2010, Boyd announced that his debut solo album, The Wild Trapeze was released. On June 21, 2010, a music video for Boyd's first single from The Wild Trapeze, entitled "Runaway Train," was released online. A second music video was released for the album, for the song "Last Night a Passenger" in October 2010.
On January 18, 2013 Brandon announced his new band, Sons of the Sea. With Incubus on indefinite hiatus, Sons of the Sea will tour 2013 and 2014. On May 29, 2013 Brandon released a teaser video announcing the name of the album, Sons of the Sea. That same year, he embarked on a book-signing tour of the Northeast to coincide with his latest publication "So The Echo," as well as the release of "Sons of the Sea"'s eponymous record.
Boyd is known for his wide variety of tattoos. On his forearms he carries the widely known mantra Om Mani Padme Hum, referring to the qualities of generosity, ethics, patience, diligence, renunciation and wisdom. Underneath that is a koi fish in red ink designed by friend and bandmate, José Pasillas. On the inside of his right arm he has several tattoos, one once again incorporating the Tibetan mantra and another designed after Sarah Kerrigan. Following the release of their album "A Crow Left of the Murder," he got an elaborate back tattoo featuring the common image of the All Seeing-Eye embedded in a pyramid. He also has a tattoo of the Eye of Horus on his right ankle. Other tattoos include his parents' names (Priscilla and Charles) on his forearms, an owl on his back, one teardrop on his index finger on both hands, and a picture inspired by Aubrey Beardsley's famous art, "The Peacock Skirt", on his left arm. He is now considering getting a tattoo of his life long love interest, Challie Dade.
With Incubus
Fungus Amongus (1995)
S.C.I.E.N.C.E. (1997)
Make Yourself (1999)
Morning View (2001)
A Crow Left of the Murder... (2004)
Light Grenades (2006)
Monuments and Melodies (2009)
If Not Now, When? (2011)
Trust Fall (Side A) (EP) (2015)
Solo
The Wild Trapeze (2010)
With Sons of the Sea
Compass (EP) (2013)
Sons of the Sea (2013)
