For the Kyrgyz politician, see Ivan Rebrov.
Ivan Rebroff (31 July 1931 – 27 February 2008) was a German singer, allegedly of Russian ancestry, with an extraordinary vocal range of four and a half octaves, ranging from the soprano to bass registers.
Rebroff was born in Berlin as Hans-Rolf Rippert. He studied singing at the Hochschule für Musik und Theater Hamburg. Although his knowledge and pronunciation of Russian were not perfect, he became famous for singing Russian folk songs, but also performed opera, light classics and folk songs from many other countries. He was known on stage for his gusto. He performed over 6,000 concerts in his career, including a two-year seven-day-a-week stint at the French opera, singing and acting, among other greats, the role of Tevye in Fiddler on the Roof. Rebroff still performed 12 shows in 14 days when he was well into his seventies, such as on an Australian tour.
Ivan Rebroff described himself as international, the "connection between East and West". He became a citizen of Greece and lived on the Greek island of Skopelos in the Sporades.
He died in Frankfurt after a long illness. Four days after his death, his brother Horst Rippert, who is nine years his senior (and by his own unsubstantiated accounts shot down Antoine de Saint Exupéry during World War II), claimed part of Ivan's vast fortune.
Favourites from Mother Russia
Ivan Rebroff (Includes Lara's Theme and other Popular Melodies)
Folk Songs from Old Russia (Volksweisen aus dem alten Russland)
Folk Songs from Old Russia Volume II (Volksweisen aus dem alten Russland 2)
Original russische Liebeslieder
Na Sdarowje (Ivan sings about Vodka and Wine)
Slawische Seele (Compilation album shared with Tatjana Ivanow & Dunja Rajter)
Beim Klang der Balalaika, Au son des Balalaikas (French version of Beim Klang der Balalaika)
Abendglocken (Compilation)
Russische Weihnacht mit Ivan Rebroff
A Russian Christmas (English version of Russische Weihnacht?)
Un Violon sur le toit (Soundtrack of French production of Fiddler on the Roof)
Russische Party ("Live" album)
Festliche Weihnacht (with Regensburger Domspatzen - Boys' Choir)
A Festive Christmas (Festliche Weihnacht re-issue)
Somewhere My Love (English-language versions)
Kosaken müssen reiten (German-language versions)
Ivan Rebroff (Compilation?)
The Best of Ivan Rebroff (Compilation)
Ivan Rebroff Sing vir Ons (South African Album-Gold Disk Award)
Vir Jou Suid-Afrika (South African album)
Ivan Rebroff (Opera)
Kalinka (Soundtrack from L'Homme qui vient de la Nuit)
Mein Russland, Du bist schön (German-language versions)
Starportrait (Compilation)
Zwischen Donau und Don (with Dunja Rajter)
Erinnerungen an Russland (Russian-language versions)
The Best of Ivan Rebroff Volume II (Compilation)
Lieder der Welt (Folk songs from around the world)
Mein Altes Russland (lushly arranged Russian folk songs)
25 Greatest Russian Melodies (Compilation with Tatiana Ivanov (2 duets))
20 Greatest Hits (Compilation)
Russische Party 2 ("Live" album)
Memories of Russia
Ivan Rebroff at Carnegie Hall (Live at Carnegie Hall)
Reich Mir Die Hand
Russische Lieder Von Liebe und Tod
Midnight in Moscow (Russian-language versions)
Komm mit nach Hellas (German-language versions of Greek songs)
Mitternacht in Moskau (German version of Midnight in Moscow)
Ave Maria
Die Ivan Rebroff Versameling (Compilation of South African tracks)
Zauber einer großen Stimme — 20 unvergängliche Welterfolge
Zauber einer großen Stimme — Seine größten Welterfolge
Die schönsten Lieder dieser Welt (Ivan Rebroff singt 20 unvergängliche Melodien)
Katharina und Potemkin (TV Musical/Operetta)
Die Fledermaus (Johann Strauss) conducted by Carlos Kleiber - Deutsche Grammophon - with Hermann Prey; Julia Varady; Lucia Popp; Rene Kollo; Bernd Weikl; Benno Kusche; and Eva List - Bayerischer Staatsopernchor & Bayerisches Staatsorchester
Meine Reise um die Welt
The Great Ivan Rebroff
Ach Natascha"
Seine Größten Welterfolge
Best of Ivan Rebroff
Golden Stars
Festliche Weihnachten
The Art of Ivan Rebroff
The Best of Russian Folk Songs Vol. 1
The Best of Russian Folk Songs Vol. 2
Erinnerungen an das letzte Jahrhundert (Memories of the Last Century)
Der Zarewitsch
Die Fledermaus (As Prince Orlofsky, with Carlos Kleiber & Bavarian State Orchestra)
Weihnachten mit Ivan Rebroff
Die schönste Stimme Rußlands
Kosakenträume
