Inside Out was a hardcore punk band from Orange County, California. It was fronted by Zack de la Rocha, later of Rage Against the Machine.
Inside Out existed from August 1988 to roughly fall of 1991, releasing a single 7" EP, No Spiritual Surrender, in 1990, on Revelation Records (later converted to six song CD). They played up and down the West Coast and even toured the East Coast once before their breakup in 1991. They had written material for a second record, to be titled Rage Against the Machine (whence the name for de la Rocha's next band came), but the band broke up shortly after their guitarist, Vic DiCara, left the band to become a Hare Krishna monk. Inside Out performed on California radio station KXLU, showcasing a number of new songs. The quality of the recording on the show, while adequate for a radio broadcast, is not on par with that of the band's EP recording. Copies of their live radio appearance and various live sets have circulated the tape trading underground and file sharing world for years as popular items. In early 2013, a high quality version of one of their final shows from May 1991 surfaced and was remastered and made publicly available. Lyrics to the previously unreleased songs "Rage Against the Machine" and "Darkness of Greed" were deciphered, and together they give new context to the early beginnings of Rage Against the Machine. Some of their songs focus on issues in society and in the USA (Redemption, Burning Fight) and some are personal to members of the band (Sacrifice, By a Thread). Many of their songs themes are spiritual, but not necessarily religious.
In 2006, the track "No Spiritual Surrender" was contributed to the mashup album Threat: Music That Inspired the Movie, where it was remixed by Oktopus from Dälek and dubbed "Ghost in the Machine".
Zack de la Rocha - vocals (Rage Against the Machine, Hardstance, One Day as a Lion, Farside)
Vic DiCara - guitar (Shelter, Beyond, Burn, 108)
Mark Hayworth - bass (Hardstance, Gorilla Biscuits)
Chris Bratton - drums (Justice League, No For An Answer, Chain of Strength, Statue, Wool)
Alex Barreto - drums (Against the Wall, Chain of Strength, Hardstance, Statue, World's Fastest Car, Ignite, Alien Ant Farm)
Sterling Wilson - bass (Reason to Believe, No For An Answer)
Mike Down - guitar (Amenity, Forced Down)
Joey Piro - drums (Pitchfork, Forced Down)
Mike Rosas - guitar (Headfirst, Smile)
No Spiritual Surrender - EP, (1990)
