We Are Motörhead is the fifteenth studio album by the band Motörhead, released 16 May 2000, on Steamhammer, their fifth with the label, equalling their Bronze Records total of full length original album releases, something of a feat for this band.
The album contains a cover of the punk band The Sex Pistols' song "God Save the Queen," for which the band recorded a promo video atop an open-top London bus. In the Motörhead documentary The Guts and the Glory vocalist and bassist Lemmy Kilmister declares:
"..I think We Are Motörhead was a much better album than it got credit for.."
At the time of We Are Motörhead's release, the band was in competition with itself as the compilations Deaf Forever and The Best of Motörhead also came out, something the band had no control over.
Joe Petagno, the sleeve artist, commented on the influences behind the cover concept:
"..It's one of my favourite pieces. At that time, there was a lot of death metal and black metal going on. I was working with a lot of those people anyway. They were all totally Motörhead dedicated, and grew up with Motörhead. I said, "Listen, instead of letting these guys sort of get to you, why don't we just pay homage to the death thing? That's cool enough. You guys were the first to do it anyway". In the original sketch, the head was turned three-quarter view, but Lemmy said we'd never used the head since "Deaf Forever" from the side. So why don't we just give it a full profile?.."
AllMusic review states:
"..'We Are Motörhead' maintains the generally high standard of the band's second decade, and while there aren't many speed-freak theatrics...the grimy attitude that's always driven their best work is fully intact. Pared back down to a trio, Kilmister and company deliver a tight, blistering set that's both well-executed and typical of Motörhead's long since established sound.."
All songs written and composed by Kilmister, Campbell, Dee except where noted . 
Lemmy – lead vocals, bass
Phil Campbell – lead guitar
Mikkey Dee – drums
Producer - Bob Kulick, Bruce Bouillet and Duane Baron
Engineer - Bill Cooper
Recorded - Karo Studios, Brackel, Germany June 1999-August 1999 & American Recorders, Calabasas, California, December 1999-March 2000
Executive Producers - Motörhead
Album Design - Mark Ambrose/Zen Jam (design), Stefan Chirazi (concept), Glen La Ferman, Stephanie Cabral, Annamaria DiSanto, G$ (photography)
Album Cover & Snaggletooth - Joe Petagno & Lemmy
