George Winston (born 1949) is an American pianist who was born in Michigan, and grew up mainly in Miles City, and Billings, Montana, as well as Mississippi and Florida. He is best known for his solo piano recordings; several of his albums from the early 1980s have sold millions of copies each. Winston plays in three styles: the melodic approach he came up that he calls "rural folk piano."; Stride piano, primarily inspired by Thomas "Fats" Waller and Teddy Wilson; and his primary interest, New Orleans R&B piano, influenced by James Booker, Professor Longhair, and Henry Butler.
When growing up, Winston's interest in music were instrumentals of R&B, rock, pop, and jazz genres, especially by organists. After hearing The Doors in 1967, he was inspired to start playing the organ. In 1971, he switched to solo piano after hearing Stride pianists Thomas "Fats" Waller, Teddy Wilson, and later Earl Hines, Donald Lambert and Cleo Brown.
Winston attended Stetson University in DeLand, Florida in the 1960s, where he majored in sociology. While he did not complete his undergraduate degree, following his rise to prominence the university awarded him an honorary doctor of arts degree.
George Winston was sixteen years old when the animated TV special A Charlie Brown Christmas premiered in 1965, and he bought the soundtrack album the next day featuring the music of Vince Guaraldi. He eagerly awaited each new Peanuts special to hear Guaraldi's newest music. In 1996, Winston released Linus and Lucy – The Music of Vince Guaraldi, primarily devoted to the theme music Guaraldi wrote for the Peanuts cartoons: 15 television specials and one feature film, ranging from 1965 until Guaraldi’s death in 1976. "I love his melodies and his chord progressions," Winston said of Guaraldi. "He has a really personal way of doing voicings." Winston recorded a follow-up album, Love Will Come – The Music of Vince Guaraldi, Volume 2, released in February 2010.
Winston was first recorded by John Fahey for Fahey's Takoma Records. The album Ballads and Blues 1972 disappeared without much notice, although it was later reissued on Winston's Dancing Cat Records. In 1979, William Ackerman talked with Winston about recording for Ackerman's new record label, Windham Hill Records. At first, Winston played some guitar pieces he liked, and then some of his nighttime music on the piano, and that became the basis for the record Autumn, which Ackerman produced. Autumn soon became the best-selling record in the Windham Hill catalog, and his albums December and Winter into Spring both went platinum (million-plus sales in the United States). He has recorded twelve more solo piano albums, and he is one of the best known performers playing contemporary instrumental music.
Winston's 2002 album Night Divides the Day – The Music of the Doors consists of solo piano renditions of music by the band The Doors. The title of the album is a lyric from their song "Break on Through (To the Other Side)".
In addition to his piano work, Winston plays solo harmonica (mainly Appalachian fiddle tunes and ballads) , solo acoustic guitar (mainly Appalachian fiddle tunes and Hawaiian slack-key guitar pieces). Both his harmonica and guitar playing can be heard on his benefit album Remembrance - A Memorial Benefit, which was released shortly after 9/11. In 2006, he recorded another benefit album, Gulf Coast Blues & Impressions: A Hurricane Relief Benefit, followed by Gulf Coast Blues & Impressions 2: A Louisiana Wetlands Benefit in 2012.
Winston also produces recordings of Hawaiian slack-key guitarists for his own record label, Dancing Cat Records, including artists Keola Beamer, Sonny Chillingworth, Leonard Kwan, Dennis Kamakahi, Ray Kane, Cyril Pahinui, Bla Pahinui, Martin Pahinui, Ledward Kaapana, Georg Kuo, Ozzie Kotani, George Kahumoku, Jr., Moses Kahumoku, Cinty Combs,and others. He is also working on recording the American traditional musicians Sam Hinton, Rick Epping and Curt Bouterse.
Many of Winston’s melodic pieces are self-described as "rural folk piano" or "folk piano", a style he developed in 1971 to complement the uptempo Stride piano he had been inspired to play by Fats Waller’s recordings from the 1920s and 1930s. These melodic pieces evoke the essence of a season and reflect natural landscapes. The third style he plays is New Orleans R&B piano, influenced mainly by James Booker, Professor Longhair, Henry Butler, as well as Dr. John and Jon Cleary.
Winston dresses unassumingly for his shows, playing in stocking feet, stating that it quiets his "hard beat pounding" left foot. For years, the balding, bearded Winston would walk out on stage in a flannel shirt and jeans, and the audience would think he was a technician, coming to tune the 9-foot New York Steinways that is his piano of choice. According to the Austin American Statesman in 2015: "As for his piano playing, Winston remains a master of both tone and invention. Starting with a bluesy tune inspired by Professor Longhair — Winston’s most recent albums have included two Gulf Coast-inspired collections — he proceeded through seasonal favorites 'Rain' (from 1982’s Winter Into Spring) and 'Woods' (from 1980’s Autumn). On the latter, he created remarkable 'hollowed' sounds to some notes by reaching inside the piano and muting strings with one hand while striking keys with the other."
On April 19, 2010 he appeared as the sole guest on show 575 of the multimedia WoodSongs Old-Time Radio Hour. Twenty minutes into the program he describes an unusual method of playing the piano muting the strings, that he developed that was inspired by watching blues guitar players. He can be seen reaching into the piano with his left hand and muting the strings, while with his right hand he is playing "An African in the Americas".
Winston lives in Santa Cruz, California.
Winston won a 1996 Grammy Award for the album Forest.
1972 Ballads and Blues 1972
1980 Autumn
1982 Winter into Spring
1982 December
1991 Summer
1994 Forest
1996 Linus and Lucy – The Music of Vince Guaraldi
1999 Plains
2002 Night Divides the Day – The Music of the Doors
2004 Montana – A Love Story
2006 Gulf Coast Blues & Impressions: A Hurricane Relief Benefit
2010 Love Will Come – The Music of Vince Guaraldi, Volume 2
2012 Gulf Coast Blues & Impressions 2: A Louisiana Wetlands Benefit
2013 Harmonica Solos
2001 Remembrance - A Memorial Benefit (piano, guitar & harmonica solos)
2013 Silent Night - A Benefit Single for Feeding America
2015 Spring Carousel - A Cancer Research Benefit EP
1984 The Velveteen Rabbit (solo piano soundtrack with narration by Meryl Streep)
1995 Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes (solo guitar soundtrack with narration by Liv Ullman)
1984 The Velveteen Rabbit (solo piano soundtrack with narration by Meryl Streep)
1988 This is America Charlie Brown—The Birth of the Constitution (piano & harpsichord solos)
1995 Sadako and the Thousand Paper Cranes (solo guitar soundtrack with narration by Liv Ullman)
2002 Pumpkin Circle (piano, guitar & harmonica solos, with narration by Danny Glover)
2003 Bread Comes to Life (piano, guitar & harmonica solos, with narration by Lily Tomlin)
