Cristina Adriana Chiara Scabbia (Italian pronunciation: [krisˈtiːna adriˈaːna ˈkjaːra ˈskabbja]; born 6 June 1972, Milan) is an Italian singer and lyricist, best known as one of the two vocalists in the Italian Gothic metal band Lacuna Coil. She also writes an advice column in the popular rock magazine Revolver, alongside musician Vinnie Paul. Scabbia is featured in a Megadeth song, "À Tout le Monde (Set Me Free)". She also featured on "The Theory of Everything", an album from Arjen Anthony Lucassen's Ayreon project, with which she is cast as the Mother. She is also the featured artist in the Apocalyptica song "S.O.S. (Anything But Love)" and another version of the Alter Bridge song "Watch Over You". Scabbia has said that the biggest compliment that a fan could pay her would be to remark on her vocal abilities. Her highest note ever hit is claimed to be an A7. Scabbia performed a duet with the Italian ex-singer of Linea 77 Emiliano Audisio on the track "Beautiful Lie" to be part of the soundtrack for the 2013 Italian film Passione sinistra. Scabbia has been in a relationship with Slipknot guitarist Jim Root since 2004.
In 1991, Scabbia began singing professionally as a touring musician for other bands and providing backing vocals. Later that year, she met the male vocalist Andrea Ferro and bass player Marco Coti Zelati of Lacuna Coil in Milan's Midnight club. At the time, the band was named Ethereal, and Scabbia was first employed only as a session singer. She was employed to record backup vocals for the choruses of songs on their demo tape, but the band members liked the way the male and female vocals sounded together, and asked her to be a permanent member. After several changes in the band's line-up, the members were reduced to Ferro, Coti Zelati and Scabbia. The members recorded a two track demo in May 1996, and were soon signed by the German branch of Century Media, eventually joining with the American branch of the label. Once signed, the band changed their name to Lacuna Coil after learning that a Greek band signed to Century Media had already claimed the name Ethereal. Adding new band members, Lacuna Coil began to tour, releasing their first album in 1997.
