"Black and Yellow" is a song by American rapper Wiz Khalifa from his third studio album, Rolling Papers. It was released on September 14, 2010, as the lead single from the album. The song was written by Khalifa, along with Stargate, who produced it. It was released as a CD single in honor of Record Store Day. The song peaked at No. 1 on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Wiz Khalifa's first number-one single in the US; he would top the chart again in 2015 with "See You Again".
The song is a reference to the colors of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and their NFL team, the Pittsburgh Steelers. Khalifa has stated that he bought a car in those colors because of his allegiance to Pittsburgh and the Steelers. The music video for the song made the connection to Pittsburgh explicit, showing various iconic locations in the city. In the year after it was released, "Black and Yellow" spawned dozens of remixes, parodies and remakes, both in the US and internationally.
On the issue dated October 2, 2010, "Black and Yellow" debuted at No. 100 on the Billboard Hot 100. It then dropped out the following week and re-entered at No. 64 on the issue dated October 30, 2010. On its eighteenth charting week, the song rose to No. 1 on the issue dated February 19, 2011, selling 198,000 digital copies that week. "Black and Yellow" has sold 4,144,922 digital copies since release.
The music video was directed by Bill Paladino. It was filmed in Pittsburgh and features sights of the city, including the U.S. Steel Tower, BNY Mellon Center, PPG Place, William Penn Hotel, Citizens Bank Tower, Union Trust Building, One PNC Plaza, K&L Gates Center the Three Sisters and Smithfield Street bridges, Station Square, Shannon Hall of the Art Institute of Pittsburgh and the smoke stacks of the former U.S. Steel Homestead Works at The Waterfront adjacent to the city. The video also prominently features city icons such as the Terrible Towel, a rally towel for the Pittsburgh Steelers, and city sports in general, as well as Pittsburgh Pirates apparel. It was recorded in Chatsworth Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA.
The song was featured in the first teaser trailer of The Lego Batman Movie.
The official remix, "Black & Yellow (G-Mix)" features west-coast rapper Snoop Dogg, Juicy J and R&B singer T-Pain. Wiz Khalifa has a new verse on the track. The song leaked on December 12, 2010 but was officially released on December 16. A video for the remix was shot and was released on January 8, 2011. A remix by T-Pain, named "Black & Yellow (T-Mix)", featured the verse that was later put on the official remix.
Digital download
"Black and Yellow" (Explicit Album Version) – 3:37
Digital download (G-Mix)
"Black and Yellow" (G-Mix) (featuring Snoop Dogg, Juicy J & T-Pain) – 4:38
Many remakes have been made, mostly in tribute to other sports teams, referring to their respective pair of colors. Some of the notable remakes include:
"Purp & Yellow" by Game, Snoop Dogg, and YG, representing the Los Angeles Lakers. This version also had a remix produced by DJ Skee, with a rock-instrumented backing track; a music video for the DJ Skee remix featured the artists as well as members of the Lakers. An extended mix was released the next day, also featuring Kendrick Lamar, Joe Moses and Thurzday.
"Rossonero (Red and Black)" by Denny La Home feat. Jake La Furia - Italian version performed by two Italian rappers. The colours refer to Italian football club AC Milan.
"Eff Australia" by Rucka Rucka Ali - an anti-Australian song.
"Green and Yellow" by Lil Wayne, representing the Green Bay Packers, who defeated the Pittsburgh Steelers in Super Bowl XLV.
"White and Navy" by Fabolous representing New York City, and the New York Yankees.
"Black and Yellow (Mike Tomlin)" by Wale, in reference to the Steelers' head coach Mike Tomlin.
"Yeah Carmelo" by Maino, in reference to Carmelo Anthony of the New York Knicks.
"Black and Red" by Jermaine Dupri representing the Atlanta Falcons.
"Black and Orange" by San Quinn representing the San Francisco Giants in their 2010 World Series victory.
"White and Purple" by Chet Haze (son of actor Tom Hanks), representing Northwestern University.
"Black and Yellow" by Tyler Ward and Crew and Cobus, a rock version.
"Black and Ghetto" by Serius Jones describing the lifestyle of being an African American gangster.
"Green and Purple" by Kritikal which refers to marijuana and the culture surrounding it.
"Blue and Green" by TNT for the NFL team, Seattle Seahawks. 
In addition, a number of freestyle versions have been released, of artists rapping over "Black and Yellow"'s instrumental track, without any overt reference to the song or to sports teams. These include versions by Crooked I (who included a chorus of "packing metal"), Donnis, Young Jeezy, Tyga, Novi Novak also Layzie Bone and Flesh-n-Bone of Bone Thugs-n-Harmony.
"Black and Yellow" By Chris Lee Cobbins. A Christian Hit.
