Mutter (German for "mother") is the third album by Neue Deutsche Härte band Rammstein. It was released on April 2, 2001 through Motor Music. The album's cover image is a photograph of a dead fetus, which was taken by Daniel & Geo Fuchs. Overall the album has spawned six singles which is, by far, the most singles released from any Rammstein album.
In 2005, Mutter was ranked number 324 in Rock Hard magazine's book of The 500 Greatest Rock & Metal Albums of All Time.
All songs written and composed by Rammstein. 
There are various editions of Mutter, each with different features:
The Limited Tour Edition had the same cover, but red with the Rammstein logo embossed on the front. It also had a second CD with the following live tracks:
"Ich will" – 3:57
"Links 2-3-4" – 4:54
"Sonne" – 4:42
"Spieluhr" – 5:27
The Japanese edition had "Hallelujah" as a hidden track, found after "Nebel" (there is a two-minute intermission of silence). The track was later included in Resident Evil soundtrack, but does not appear in the film.
Another Japanese edition had "Hallelujah" as a 12th track.
The limited edition had a second CD with just one track, "Hallelujah", and a CD-ROM area featuring the "Sonne" video.
A 12" vinyl version and a MC version were released, with the same tracklist (Side A = 1–6; B = 7–11)
The Limited Tour Edition was also released as a double cassette set, with the second cassette containing the live tracks (Side A = 1–2; B = 3–4).
Note: Some copies that have "Hallelujah" as a hidden track can not be played for unknown reasons. On April 3, 2010 Rammstein posted a video with an official translation of "Hallelujah" on their Facebook page, "in light of recent events".
Rammstein
Till Lindemann – vocals
Richard Z. Kruspe – electric guitar
Paul H. Landers – electric guitar
Oliver "Ollie" Riedel – bass guitar
Christoph "Doom" Schneider – drums
Christian "Flake" Lorenz – keyboards
Guest musicians
Bobo – background vocals (track 11)
Khira Li Lindemann – vocals (track 7)
Olsen Involtini – string arrangements (tracks 1, 6, 11)
Orchestra parts by the Deutsches Filmorchester Babelsberg, conducted by Gunter Joseck
Production
Ulf Kruckenberg – engineer
Dirk Rudolph – sleeve design
Daniel & Geo Fuchs – photography
