"Dancing Queen" is a song by the Swedish group ABBA, and the lead single from their fourth studio album, Arrival. It was written by Benny Andersson, Björn Ulvaeus and Stig Anderson. Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus also produced the song. It was released as a single in Sweden on 16 August 1976, followed by a UK release and the rest of Europe a few days later. It quickly became a monumental worldwide hit, receiving extensive radio airplay and gaining popularity at nightclubs. It became ABBA's only number one hit in the United States, also topping the charts in Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, Norway, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, West Germany and Zimbabwe, and reaching the Top 5 in many other countries.
Musically, "Dancing Queen" is a Europop version of American disco music. As disco music dominated the US charts, the group decided to follow the trend, replicating the "Wall of Sound." The song alternates between "languid yet seductive verses" and a "dramatic chorus that ascends to heart-tugging high notes." It features keyboard lines by Andersson, which accentuate the melody's sophistication and classical complexity, while Ulvaeus and Andersson interlace many instrumental hooks in and out of the mix. Anni-Frid Lyngstad and Agnetha Fältskog's layered vocals have been noted for their dynamism, "[negotiating] the melody's many turns flawlessly." Lyrically, the song concerns a visit to the discotheque, but approaches the subject from the joy of dancing itself, thus having a greater emotional content than many disco songs.
The recording sessions for "Dancing Queen" began on 4 August 1975. The demo was called "Boogaloo" and as the sessions progressed, Andersson and Ulvaeus found inspiration to the dance rhythm in George McCrae's "Rock Your Baby," as well as the drumming on Dr. John's 1972 album Dr. John's Gumbo. The main melodic riff echoes 'Sing My Way Home' by Delaney & Bonnie (from Motel Shot, 1971). Fältskog and Lyngstad recorded the vocals on sessions in September 1975, and the track was completed three months later.
During the sessions, Benny Andersson brought a tape home with the backing track on it and played it to Anni-Frid Lyngstad, who apparently started crying when listening: "I found the song so beautiful. It's one of those songs that goes straight to your heart." Agnetha Fältskog later said: "It's often difficult to know what will be a hit. The exception was 'Dancing Queen.' We all knew it was going to be massive." Benny Andersson agreed, calling it "one of those songs where you know during the sessions that it's going to be a smash hit."
While working on the lyrics, half of the second verse was scrapped: "Baby, baby, you're out of sight/hey, you're looking all right tonight/when you come to the party/listen to the guys/they've got the look in their eyes..." It survives in footage from a recording session.
After having premiered on German and Japanese TV during the spring of 1976, "Dancing Queen" saw its first live and domestic performance, televised on Swedish TV on 18 June 1976, during an all-star gala staged by Kjerstin Dellert at the Royal Swedish Opera in honour of King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden and his bride-to-be, Silvia Sommerlath, who were to be married the next day.
For their 1980 Spanish language album/compilation "Gracias Por La Música," ABBA recorded a Spanish version of "Dancing Queen," renamed "Reina Danzante", with Spanish lyrics provided by Buddy and Mary McCluskey. The track was later retitled "La Reina Del Baile" when included on the later compilation album ABBA Oro: Grandes Éxitos in the 1990s.
In 1993, in honor of Swedish Queen Silvia´s 50th birthday, Anni-Frid Lyngstad was asked to perform "Dancing Queen" on stage, repeating ABBA's 1976 performance of the song at the wedding reception of King Carl XVI Gustaf and Queen Silvia. Frida contacted The Real Group and together they did an a cappella version of the song on stage at the Royal Opera House in Stockholm, in front of the king and queen. The Swedish Prime Minister at the time, Ingvar Carlsson, was also in the audience that night and said it was an ingenious idea to perform "Dancing Queen" a cappella. This performance with Lyngstad and The Real Group was filmed by Swedish Television SVT and is included in Frida – The DVD.
For the 1994 Australian film Muriel's Wedding songwriters Ulvaeus and Andersson allowed the use of "Dancing Queen" and other ABBA hits for its soundtrack. It was one of the ABBA songs included in Mamma Mia! the West End musical that was first produced in 1999 and which was later adapted into a movie in 2008.
The first International Standard Musical Work Code was assigned in 1995 to "Dancing Queen;" the code is T-000.000.001-0.
"Dancing Queen" became a massive worldwide hit, topping the charts in more than a dozen countries including ABBA's native Sweden (where it spent 14 weeks at the top), Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Germany, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway (where it charted for 32 weeks (VG-lista Top 10), making it the 11th best-performing single of all time in that country), South Africa and Rhodesia. "Dancing Queen" also topped the charts in the United States, ABBA's only #1 on the Billboard Hot 100, and was a Top 5 hit in Austria, Finland, France and Switzerland. The song sold over three million copies.
Widely regarded as one of the greatest pop songs of all time, "Dancing Queen" is considered ABBA's most enduringly popular song. According to Donald A. Guarisco of AllMusic, the track's "sincerity and sheer musicality have allowed it to outlast the disco boom and become a standard of dance-pop." The song's release also cemented ABBA as an international act and signified the beginning of the group's 'classic period,' which would encompass the following four years. Still a favorite at dance clubs today, it has become a standard for dance divas like Carol Douglas and Kylie Minogue, and has been covered numerous times by acts including the Sex Pistols and U2. Since its release, it has been adopted by the LGBT community, and remains one of the most ubiquitous "gay anthems."
In the UK Singles Chart, "Dancing Queen" was the last of three consecutive No. 1s for ABBA in 1976, following "Mamma Mia" and "Fernando" earlier in the year.
In 1992, the song was re-released in the UK, as Erasure sparked an ABBA revival after the success of their Abba-esque EP topping the UK charts. The re-issued "Dancing Queen" reached #16 in the UK in September 1992.
In 2000, "Dancing Queen" came fourth in a Channel 4 television poll of "The 100 Best Number Ones." It was chosen as #148 as part of the 365 Songs of the Century list. It is also ranked #174 on Rolling Stone's list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time, the only ABBA song on the list. That same year, it made VH1's 100 Greatest Dance Songs in Rock & Roll at #97. Also in 2000, editors of The Rolling Stone with MTV compiled a list of the best 100 pop songs. "Dancing Queen" was the 12th highest placed song from the 1970s.
On 9 November 2002, the results of a poll, "Top 50 Favourite UK #1's," was broadcast on Radio 2, celebrating the 50th anniversary of The Official UK Charts Company. 188,357 listeners voted and "Dancing Queen" came out at #8. On 5 December 2010, Britain's ITV broadcast the results of a poll to determine "The Nation's Favourite ABBA Song," in which "Dancing Queen" was placed at #2.
On 19 August 2005, the song was featured on a music player turned on by Boabby the Barman in The Clansman pub in Series 4 Episode 5 ('Hatch') of the Scottish Sitcom Still Game.
In 2009, the British performing rights group Phonographic Performance Limited celebrated its 75th anniversary by listing the 75 songs that have played most in Great Britain on the radio, in clubs and on jukeboxes. "Dancing Queen" was number eight on the list.
Former U.S. presidential candidate John McCain named "Dancing Queen" as his favorite song in a top 10 list submitted to Blender Magazine in August 2008. Also in August 2008, "Dancing Queen" surpassed the 500,000 mark for digital sales in the United States (512,000).
In August 2012 listeners to the 1970s-themed UK radio station "Smooth 70s" voted "Dancing Queen" as their favourite hit of the decade.
In October 2014, the musical instrument insurer Musicguard carried out a survey determining "Dancing Queen" to be the United Kingdom's favourite "floorfiller." Unlike its closest competitors, "Billie Jean" by Michael Jackson (#2) and "Twist and Shout" by The Beatles (#3), it turned out to be very popular throughout the nation whereas the other two were strong regional favourites.
In March 2015, "Dancing Queen" became the five thousandth song in "The Chain" on the Radcliffe and Maconie Show on BBC 6Music. The Chain is officially the longest listener-generated thematically linked sequence of musically based items on the radio.
The song was parodied in the Gravity Falls episode "Dipper vs Manliness," which features the song "Disco Girl," by a fictional Icelandic pop group named "Babba".
 7" Vinyl
"Dancing Queen" - 3:52
"That's Me" - 3:15
1992 7" European Re-issue
"Dancing Queen" - 3:52
"Lay All Your Love on Me" - 4:35
1992 12"/CD European Re-issue
"Dancing Queen" - 3:52
"Lay All Your Love on Me" - 4:35
"The Day Before You Came" - 5:50
"Eagle" - 5:49
1992 12" US Re-issue
"Dancing Queen" - 3:52
"Take a Chance on Me" - 4:04
"Dancing Queen" was A-Teens' fourth and final single from their first album The ABBA Generation.
When the single came out in the spring of 2000, it peaked at number one in Mexico, becoming their first number one hit in that country. The song was also a smash hit in South America peaking at number three in Argentina, number five in Chile, number six in Colombia and number fifteen in Brazil.
This was the main single for the United States promotion, when the album was released in March 2000. "Dancing Queen" reached ninety-five on the Billboard Hot 100, thirty-six on Airplay and number thirteen on the Hot Single Sales Chart.
"Dancing Queen" was released as a double A-side with "The Name of the Game" in Europe, where both the songs were promoted on radio at the same time, because Universal Music Group thought that "Dancing Queen", being the last single, needed a back-up to be successful. The video for "The Name of the Game" was an unofficial video, made especially for an A-Teens TV special in Sweden and it was never intended to be a promotional video. It was only aired by Channel 4. It appeared in the album, "Lizzie McGuire: Total Party!".
Directed by Patrick Kiely, it was the first A-Teens video to be filmed in the United States. It was filmed on 7 March 2000, the same day the song was released. The video is a tribute to the movie The Breakfast Club. Paul Gleason, the actor who played the principal in the film, plays the same role in the video. When the principal leaves the members of the band (and many extras to serve as background dancers) alone in the detention room the school transforms into a discotheque.
European 2-Track CD single
"Dancing Queen" [album version] – 3:48
"The Name of the Game" – 4:17
European/Mexican CD maxi
"Dancing Queen" [album version] – 3:48
"Dancing Queen" [Pierre J's Main Radio Mix] – 3:27
"Dancing Queen" [Pierre J's Main Extended Mix] – 5:47
"Dancing Queen" [BTS Gold Edition Mix] – 5:13
U.S. CD single
"Dancing Queen" [album version] – 3:48
"Dancing Queen" [extended version] – 5:48
U.S. cassette
"Dancing Queen" [album version] – 3:48
"Dancing Queen" [extended version] – 5:48
Abbacadabra (from various compilations released by Almighty Records)
Angeleyes on the album ABBADance (1999)
Jodi Albert and Carley Stenson from ABBAMania 2 (2004)
Arrival from their album First Flight (1999)
Audioscam on the album Abbattack (2008)
Claudja Barry
Candy Cane
Chet Lam, a Hong Kong-based indie musician, recorded the song on his "Camping" (2006)
Beat Crusaders on their album Musicrusaders (2005)
Milo Binder on the promo compilation Rolling Stone – Rare Trax Vol. 2 (1997)
Black Sweden on Gold (2004) ~ often mistakenly listed as Black Sabbath on P2P filesharing networks
Luka Bloom on his album Keeper of the Flame (2000)
BNB on the album Bossa Mia: Songs of ABBA (2008)
Brotherhood of Man on their album Sing 20 Number One Hits (1980)
Donna Burke from Japanese ABBA Ibiza Caliente Mix
Belinda Carlisle from the German ABBA Mania album (2005), which tied into a TV special
Philippe Cohen Solal featuring Melonie Cannon on the album Solal Presents: The Moonshine Sessions (2007)
Diablo on their album Elegance In Black (2000)
Chixie Dix on the compilation ABBAlicious (2004)
Carol Douglas on her album Full Bloom (1977)
Esang de Torres
Eric Bibb on his album Even Better Than the Disco Thing (2008)
E-Rotic from ABBA tribute album Thank You for the Music (1997)
Euphorica on the album ABBA Dance (2003)
Frank Turner on the album The First Three Years (2008)
Flock of Doug on the album Wish I Were Here (2004)
Garageland from New Zealand tribute album Abbasalutely (1995)
Girl Authority from their self-titled Girl Authority album (2005)
Glow on the compilation A Tribute to ABBA (also released as ABBAMetal) (2001)
The Grace a.k.a. TSZX on their album 한번더, OK? (2007)
Jive Bunny and the Mastermixers on their album Non-Stop ABBA Party
Mambo Kurt from Spiel, Heimorgel spiel (2007)
Coco Lee on her album CoCo's Party (1996) and ABBA: A Tribute – The 25th Anniversary Celebration (1999).
London Philharmonic Orchestra
Jennifer Love Hewitt on her album Love Songs (1992)
Issa on the Electronic Tribute to ABBA compilation (2001)
Pamela McNeill from Tribute To ABBA album
Munich Philharmonic Orchestra
Nils Landgren from Funky ABBA (2004)
Manabu Nagayama and Shunji Suzuki from Natural Beauty Basic Presents Blend compilation (2004)
Oompah Brass in 3/4 on Oompocalypse Now (2008).
P from their self-titled album (1995)
Pink Lady on an episode of their variety show Pink Lady and Jeff.
Franck Pourcel
Raining Pleasure (featured in the Greek film Hardcore)
Rajaton from Rajaton Sings ABBA With The Lahti Symphony Orchestra (2006)
The Real Group from ABBA: A Tribute – The 25th Anniversary Celebration (1999)
Redd Kross
Regine Velasquez
Richard Clayderman played an instrumental version on his album The ABBA Collection
Riff Raff from Rock 'N' Roll Mutation Vol. 1: Riff Raff Performs ABBA (2006)
Rob ‘N’ Raz DLC from ABBA: The Tribute (1992)
Rozalla
Inger Lise Rypdal
Marion Rung had a 1977 single release of the Finnish rendering "Prinsessa"
Kalomoira Saranti and Giwrgos Xristou
S Club 7 from ABBAmania (1999)
SD Project on the album ABBA Chill Out (2006)
San Francisco Gay Men's Chorus from the album ExtrABBAganza! (1997)
Seppo Rannikko from the album Sahara (1976)
SexBomb Girls
Shana Vanguarde
Sixpence None the Richer from Dick (1999) soundtrack and The Best of Sixpence None the Richer (2004)
The Spooky Men's Chorale (2009)
Steps (1999) and again for their The Ultimate Collection (Steps album) album (2011)
Stixx on the EP Scotsmanality Survivor
The Ten Tenors
Texas Lightning from Meanwhile, Back at the Ranch (2005)
Vocal Six on the CD "International" 2006
Wing from her album Wing Sings ABBA
Victor Wong
The Yayhoos from their album Fear Not The Obvious (2001)
Tracy Huang from her album "Mississippi" (1977)
Meryl Streep Christine Baranski Julie Walters for the Soundtrack of the movie Mamma Mia
Naya Rivera and Amber Riley of the Glee Cast performed the song in the season 2 episode Prom Queen
The KLF, under The JAMs moniker, sampled "Dancing Queen" for "The Queen and I" on their debut album 1987 (What the Fuck Is Going On?). ABBA and the Mechanical-Copyright Protection Society forced them to "deliver up the master tape, mothers, stampers and any other parts commensurate with manufacture of the record". King Boy D and Rockman Rock travelled to Sweden to destroy the unsold copies there.
Norwegian doctor, politician, author, comedian and singer Trond Viggo Torgersen recorded a version of the song as "Danskebåtartisten" (The Danish Boat Artist), a Swede (probably a woman), where his character doesn't understand the lyrics sheet while singing the song and requests help from somebody called/nicknamed Stikkan (possibly a reference to Stig Anderson)
Alanis Morissette
Edurne (in the TV show Operación Triunfo in Spain)
Dan Baird (with the Sofa Kings)
Jimmy Barnes on The Andrew Denton Breakfast Show – Musical Challenge (2000)
Girls' Generation
Belle & Sebastian
Christy Carlson Romano (on the TV series Even Stevens)
The Continentals
John Frusciante of the Red Hot Chili Peppers
Robbie Fulks
Paul Gilbert from the Japanese live album Acoustic Samurai
Robyn from her current world tour as a mash-up with her song "Show Me Love"
Growing Girls
Fran Healy
Taylor Hicks
The KLF
Kylie Minogue (at the closing ceremony for the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia and during her Intimate and Live Tour)
Moxy Früvous
Over the Rhine
Sex Pistols
Jason Shand
S Club 7 (Performed Live in their TV Show Miami 7 Episode 11 "Bermuda Triangle" .
The Sugarcubes (with lead singer Björk)
Sabrina Salerno (in the TV show "The Dancefloor" in Italy)
Donna Summer
Those Darn Accordions
Frank Turner
U2 (during the Zoo TV tour, 1993, and joined by Björn and Benny on stage for the track as the tour reached Stockholm)
Sarah Geronimo and Yeng Constantino (ASAP '08)
Johnny's Jr on Shounen club (Japan)
Wilson Phillips on their current Christmas Tour
Demon Kogure on Classic Rock Jam 2011 New Year's Special
Lyrics of this song at MetroLyrics