Trompe le Monde is the fourth studio album by the American alternative rock band Pixies, released in 1991 on the English independent record label 4AD in the United Kingdom and by Elektra Records in the United States. After the surf-pop of Bossanova, the album saw a return to the abrasive sound of the band's early albums.
The album was described by Michael Bonner, writing in Lime Lizard, as "one of the best albums that you may very well ever hear" and "a strong contender for best album of the 20th century". AllMusic writer Heather Phares noted the reduced role of Kim Deal, calling it "essentially Black Francis' solo debut".
The album name comes from the title of the first track, "Trompe le Monde", a French phrase meaning "Fool the World". Unlike previous albums, the title of the album comes from the name of a song (rather than a song lyric), and is a play on the French phrase "trompe l'oeil"—a painting technique in which the painter fools the viewer into thinking objects presented are real.
"Head On" is a cover of the Jesus and Mary Chain track that was released as a single reaching number 6 in the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks Chart.
"U-Mass" is a song about the University of Massachusetts Amherst, where Black Francis met Joey Santiago before dropping out to form Pixies. Santiago recalls that the original guitar riff was written while they were still enrolled.
All songs written by Black Francis except "Head On", which is written by Jim Reid and William Reid of The Jesus and Mary Chain.
"Trompe le Monde" – 1:48
"Planet of Sound" – 2:06
"Alec Eiffel" – 2:50
"The Sad Punk" – 3:00
"Head On" – 2:13
"U-Mass" – 3:01
"Palace of the Brine" – 1:34
"Letter to Memphis" – 2:39
"Bird Dream of the Olympus Mons" – 2:48
"Space (I Believe in)" – 4:18
"Subbacultcha" – 2:09
"Distance Equals Rate Times Time" – 1:24
"Lovely Day" – 2:05
"Motorway to Roswell" – 4:43
"The Navajo Know" – 2:20
Pixies
Black Francis – vocals, guitar
Kim Deal – bass guitar, vocals
David Lovering – drums
Joey Santiago – lead guitar
Additional musicians
Eric Drew Feldman – keyboards, piano
Jef Feldman – percussion
Production
Produced by Gil Norton
Engineered by Steve Haigler
Recorded at Master Control, Burbank; Pacifique, Burbank; Studio Des Dames, Paris; Blackwing, London
Mixed at Master Rock, London
Design
Art direction and design – Vaughan Oliver / v23
Design assistance – Chriss Bigg, Paul McMenamin
Photography – Simon Larbalestier
Rockets – Steven Appleby
Typesetting – TPP Ltd. London
Singles
Billboard (North America)
Gallup (United Kingdom)
