Exclusive is the second studio album by American recording artist Chris Brown. It was released on November 6, 2007, by his independently-owned record label CBE, along with Jive Records; distributed by Zomba Group. The album was serving as the follow-up to his multi-platinum selling debut album Chris Brown (2005).
The album was critically and commercially successful, debuting at number 4 on the US Billboard 200, selling 295,000 copies in the first week. The album was supported by five singles; including three Billboard Hot 100, which successfully entered in the music markets, entering the top 20 amongst other charts worldwide. The album has earned double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in the United States.
On June 3, 2008, Exclusive was re-released, when it has expanded into a double-disc deluxe edition; including a counterparts from the DVD, which was also released, which features the behind the scenes footage and music videos from his tour.
The album's lead single, "Wall to Wall" was released on May 29, 2007. The song was produced by Sean Garrett, written by Walter Scott. The single has reached only at number 79 in the US Billboard Hot 100, due to no digital release for this single.
"Kiss Kiss"; a collaboration with American recording artist T-Pain, was released as the album's second single on September 11, 2007. Following the non-success of the first single, this single became a big success in the United States. The song has reached at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 6 on the Canadian Hot 100, also reaching the top ten in Australia, Canada and New Zealand.
"With You" was released as the album's third single on December 4, 2007. The song was produced by the production team StarGate. The single became his second successful single in the most international music markets. It has since become one of the highest-charting singles of Brown's solo career, entering the foreign music markets, where his previous efforts have failed to these charts. It has reached the top ten; including in Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.
The re-release's first single from The Forever Edition, "Forever"; which was produced by Polow da Don. It was released on April 29, 2008. The song debuted at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100, due of its high digital sales. However, it dropped quickly due to the lack of sales in the following weeks. It then re-entered the top ten again, after airplay increases and has peaked at number 2.
Exclusive received generally favorable reviews from critics, scoring 69 out of 100 based on 11 reviews on Metacritic. Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone said that “It's been a long stretch between Usher albums — long enough for Chris Brown to build a whole career, growing from a temporary substitute to an undeniably major pop star. He seals the deal with Exclusive, an all-grown-up album on a level with Justin Timberlake's Justified (2002), Rihanna's Good Girl Gone Bad (2007) or even Bobby Brown's King of Stage (1986), and gave the album three and a half out of five stars.
Neil Drumming from Entertainment Weekly rated the album as B- said that, "Like his onscreen (This Christmas) character, Brown is most charming when he's playing up his youth: singing of MySpace romance, meeting his girl's 'pops,' and such". But he also said, "sadly, Brown's adolescent voice and playful scatting — while cute — are steamrolled by pushy collaborators, whether it's those Stargate guys (Ne-Yo, Rihanna) falling back on that ol' guitar noodling, or T-Pain milking his vocoder. Ease back, people, and let the boy sing". However, Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine criticized the unoriginality of the album, writing, "...there's still nothing very 'exclusive' about Exclusive at all." Michael Arceneaux of PopMatters wrote, "Exclusive seems aimless, an album where Brown is doing what he’s told versus being the anchor of his own ship." The album ranked number 34 on Rolling Stone's list of the Top 50 Albums of 2007.
The album debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 294,000 copies in the United States. As of March 2011, the album has sold 1,973,000 copies in the United States, and became a certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
At the 2011's Grammy Awards, Exclusive was nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of "Best Rap/Sung Collaboration" for "Kiss Kiss", a collaboration with T-Pain. However, the award was given to the 2007 rival single, "Umbrella" by Rihanna featuring Jay-Z. The album also nominated for a NAACP Image Awards in a category for "Best Album", while Chris himself won for "Best Male Artist". At the 2011's (2011?) BET Awards, Chris received 4 nominations in four categories, including "Best Male R&B Artist", "Best Collaboration" for "Kiss Kiss", and "Viewer’s Choice" for "Kiss Kiss" and "No Air", his duet with Jordin Sparks.
On June 22, 2011, Fearne & Reggie revealed on their UK's chart show BBC Radio 1, that all three tracks from the album Exclusive have appeared on the top forty. Two of which on the top ten, including "With You" (at number 35), "No Air" with Jordin Sparks (at number 2), and "Forever" (at number 5).
Special Edition DVD – Chris Brown on Tour (Documentary). This project consists of completed of The Forever Edition, which was re-packaged into the bonus DVD. The DVD consists, with a special montage of his performances from his recent Up-Close & Personal sold-out tour and never before seen behind the scenes footage. It also features a cameo appearances by American R&B recording artist Keyshia Cole, who she held her own sold-out Just like You tour.
Standard 16 tracks as above
It consists by two versions from "The Forever Edition", with the first one was the DVD, and the second one without the DVD. These were sold separately. In United Kingdom, which has only the CD edition available. However, throughout on every country (e.g.-including Germany and Australia), it has both editions available.
Confirmed by Wal-Mart.
Album mastered by Chris Athens at Sterling Sound, NYC
A&R administration: Shay Young
A&R coordination: Leticia Hilliard
Zomba production coordination: Cara Hutchinson
Clearances: David Schmidt, Kobie "The Quarterback" Brown, Donato Guadagnoli, Mattias End and Lisa Pinero
Art direction and design: Courtney Walter
Photography: Dave Hill and Mark Mann
Styling: Mike Bogard for Blynn Group
Executive producers for CBE: Chris Brown, Tina Davis and Mark Pitts
Executive producers for Jive / Zomba: Clive Calder and Phineas Kelly
Management: Tina M. Davis and Joyce Hawkins for The Tina Davis Company
