Ghost Opera is the eighth studio album from metal band Kamelot. It was released in 2007 by SPV GmbH/Steamhammer Records, on June 1 in Germany and followed by releases on June 4 in Europe and June 5 in the United States. It is the first studio album by Kamelot to feature keyboardist Oliver Palotai, and the last with former bassist Glenn Barry. The album spawned four music videos for the songs "Ghost Opera", "The Human Stain", "Rule the World" and "Love You to Death".
On Billboard 200, the album peaked at number 18 on Top Heatseekers and number 48 on Independent Albums.
Prior to the release of the album, SPV Records distributed a strictly limited CD single of "Ghost Opera", handed out to fans attending the European Tour in March, April and May 2007. The album was released on vinyl in the spring of 2009, along with The Black Halo.
All songs written by Kamelot.
Japanese and Limited edition bonus tracks were later included on 2007 compilation "Myths & Legends Of Kamelot".
In 2008, a reissue of Ghost Opera entitled Ghost Opera: The Second Coming was released on March 28 in Germany, March 31 for the rest of Europe and April 8 in the United States and Canada. The album was released as a double-disc set, with the first disc featuring Ghost Opera as previously released, and the videos for "The Human Stain" and "Memento Mori", filmed in Belgrade, Serbia. The second disc contained 10 live tracks from the same show, as well as three bonus tracks from Ghost Opera and The Black Halo and a remix of "Rule the World".
Roy Khan – vocals, occasional keyboards
Thomas Youngblood – guitar
Glenn Barry – bass guitar
Casey Grillo – drums
Oliver Palotai – keyboards
Miro – orchestrations, and additional keyboards
Simone Simons – female vocals on "Blücher", and "The Haunting (Somewhere in Time)" [live]
Amanda Somerville – female vocals on "Mourning Star", "Love You to Death", "Season's End" and "Ghost Opera"
Sascha Paeth – Additional guitars
Ghost Opera Choir – Amanda Somerville, Thomas Rettke, Robert Hunecke-Rizzo and Cinzia Rizzo
