Fifth Harmony is an American five-piece girl group formed on the second season of the The X Factor USA in July 2012. The group consists of members Ally Brooke, Normani Kordei, Dinah Jane, Camila Cabello, and Lauren Jauregui. They signed a joint deal with Syco Music, owned by Simon Cowell, and Epic Records, L.A. Reid's record label, after finishing in third place on the show.
Following their exit from The X Factor, they released their debut single "Miss Movin' On". Their debut EP, Better Together was released in 2013 with a first week position of number six on the U.S. Billboard 200. The following year, they won the Artist to Watch award at the MTV Video Music Awards. The group released their debut studio album, Reflection in February 2015 debuting at number five on the Billboard 200 and receiving a gold certification from the RIAA. The album included the platinum singles "Boss", "Sledgehammer" and "Worth It". The latter achieved triple platinum certification in the U.S. and reached the top 10 in thirteen countries. Their lead single, "Work from Home" from their sophomore album, 7/27, became the group's first top 5 single on the Billboard Hot 100. With 7.5 million certified records sold, Fifth Harmony has emerged as the most successful alumni from the X Factor U.S. franchise.
Fifth Harmony is composed of five singers who all successfully auditioned as soloists on the second season of The X Factor USA in 2012, but failed to progress individually to the judges' houses stage of the competition. On 27 July 2012, they were formed as a group at the end of bootcamp by Simon Cowell and Demi Lovato, thus qualifying for the "Groups" category. Originally, the group's name was "LYLAS" (acronym for Love You Like a Sister), but another group called "The Lylas" (which consists of four of Bruno Mars' sisters) claimed that the show stole their name. Thereafter, LYLAS changed their name to 1432 (which stands for I Love You Too), which was announced on the first live show on October 31, 2012, during which 1432 performed "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" by Taylor Swift. Simon Cowell and L.A. Reid were critical of the new name, and Cowell suggested that the group be renamed again. During the first live results show on November 1, 2012, 1432 performed "Skyscraper" by Demi Lovato in a sing-off with Sister C. Cowell decided to send 1432 through to the Top 12 and he announced that they would be renamed by the viewers online. The name chosen by the public was announced: "Fifth Harmony".
In the semi-finals stage of the show, they performed Ellie Goulding's "Anything Could Happen" as well as Shontelle's "Impossible" (for the second time during the competition). Their performance of "Anything Could Happen" was "a finals-caliber performance" according to L.A. Reid and described as "magic" by Britney Spears. Their performance of "Impossible" received mostly negative reviews from the judges because the group had previously performed the song at Simon Cowell's home (although not on The X Factor concert stage). Three members of the group (Camila, Lauren, and Ally) sang parts of the song in fluent Spanish. The following night's public vote results advanced Fifth Harmony to the final 3 along with Tate Stevens and Carly Rose Sonenclar. On the Top three live show, Fifth Harmony performed Ellie Goulding's "Anything Could Happen" for the second time as their "Song of the Series" song. Their second song was a duet with The X Factor judge Demi Lovato singing "Give Your Heart a Break". Their final song of the night was "Let It Be" by The Beatles, billed as their "$5 million song". After the first round of the finals they did not receive enough votes from the public to advance to the Top 2, and they finished in 3rd place on December 20, 2012.
Approximately one month following the X Factor season 2 finale, on January 14, 2013, Fifth Harmony was voted the "Next Pop Superstar of 2013" by Popdust Magazine. On January 17, Fifth Harmony was officially signed by their X Factor mentor Simon Cowell's record label Syco Music, in a joint deal with fellow X Factor judge L.A. Reid's label Epic Records. They began recording covers of songs and they uploaded these onto YouTube. Three of these covers received public praise from the original artists, namely Ed Sheeran, Ariana Grande and Mikky Ekko. Fifth Harmony was also featured on Boyce Avenue's 2013 EP "Cover Collaborations, Volume 2", singing covers of "Mirrors" by Justin Timberlake and "When I Was Your Man" by Bruno Mars.
Their debut extended play Better Together was released October 22, selling 28,000 copies in its first week and peaking on the Billboard 200 at number six. Spanish versions of the EP, Juntos and Juntos Acoustic was released on November 8, peaking at number 2 and 12 respectively on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart. The EP's lead single, "Miss Movin' On" peaked on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 76, the highest charting single from an The X Factor contestant to appear on the chart. The song was certified Gold in the United States for selling 500,000 digital downloads and streams combined. "Miss Movin' On" was nominated for a Teen Choice Award for Choice Break-Up Song. The EP's promotional single, "Me & My Girls" charted on the US Billboard Hot Digital Songs chart at 53. "Me & My Girls" won a Radio Disney Music Award for "Best Song to Rock Out to With Your BFFs".
Throughout the months of July and August 2013, Fifth Harmony performed at shopping malls across the United States in a promo tour titled "Harmonize America". On August 5, 2013 the girl group celebrated their one-year anniversary by performing five shows in New York City. The pop-up concerts throughout the city included performances at the iHeartRadio Theater and Madison Square Park. The group was one of the opening acts for Cher Lloyd during her I Wish Tour which started on September 6, 2013. On September 11, 2013 the girl group announced their first concert hall tour "Fifth Harmony 2013", playing in concert halls in Canada and the US. Their opening act was indie pop band AJR. On November 24, they performed "Better Together" on the red carpet at the 2013 American Music Awards. They supported Demi Lovato's 2014 Neon Lights Tour as the opening act playing 27 arenas across North America. On January 23, 2014, Fifth Harmony headlined the MTV Artists To Watch concert, an annual concert which showcases breakout artists that will be promoted by MTV during the year. The 2014 concert also featured performances by Tori Kelly, Rixton, Echosmith and Jake Miller.
In early 2014, Fifth Harmony confirmed reports that recording had begun for their full-length debut album with record producers Julian Bunetta, Daylight, Joe London and multi-instrumentalist songwriter Ricky Reed. The group stated the album is less pop, "more rhythmic" and has a more mature sound than Better Together. Fifth Harmony's fourth headlining promo tour was revealed at the end of March 2014, titled Fifth Times a Charm Tour, with dates in Puerto Rico and the US. It was announced by Billboard that a rep from Epic Records had confirmed that the album release was moved from December 16, 2014 to January 27, 2015.
Their debut studio album, Reflection was ultimately released on February 3, 2015. After a full week of sales, Reflection entered the US Billboard 200 at number five with 80,000 units (with 62,000 of that coming from traditional album sales) and was eventually certified Gold by the RIAA in February 2016. The album's lead single, "Boss", released on July 7, 2014, peaked at number 43 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart with first-week sales of 75,000. and received a platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for selling a million digital downloads and streams combined in the United States. The second single from Reflection, the Meghan Trainor-penned "Sledgehammer", went on to become the group's first top 40 entry on the Billboard Hot 100, and was also certified platinum by the RIAA. The third single from the album, "Worth It", featuring American rapper Kid Ink, became the album's most successful single, peaking at number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100, and receiving a triple platinum certification by the RIAA. "Worth It" also became the group's first international successful single, charting in the top ten charts in thirteen countries and receiving certifications from twelve countries.
Reflection was featured in both Rolling Stone and Complex's mid-year Best Albums of 2015 So Far lists, ranking at number 21 in the latter. The album was supported by the group's first major headlining tour, the Reflection Tour, visiting 63 cities in North America and 6 cities in Europe
On December 4, 2014, they were invited to sing at the White House for the National Christmas Tree Lighting, where they performed a cover of Mariah Carey's hit Christmas song, "All I Want for Christmas Is You". Fifth Harmony returned to the White House on April 6, 2015 to perform at the annually-held White House Easter Egg Roll. They promoted their single "Worth It" with televised performances on the Dancing with the Stars finale and their first late night appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live on June 18, 2015 with Kid Ink for the first time. They released "I'm in Love with a Monster" on September 25, 2015, a song for the film Hotel Transylvania 2. It was featured in the trailer for the movie, and was heard in the movie as well. On October 25, 2015, Fifth Harmony performed "Worth It" at the 2015 MTV Europe Music Awards red carpet.
On September 23, 2015, the group announced they had started recording for their second studio album. The album is said to be produced by Max Martin, Stargate and other producers. Band members Lauren Jauregui and Dinah Jane have written a few songs for the album along with the likes of Mitch Allan, Jason Evigan, Aaron Pearce, Tayla Parx, etc.
On December 11, 2015, the group received the "Group of the Year" award at Billboard Women in Music 2015 ceremony.
In January 2016, it was announced that Fifth Harmony had moved from Faculty Management and Productions to a new management company, Maverick management. After a winter break, it was announced on February 25, 2016, that Fifth Harmony will be releasing their second studio album "7/27" on May 20, 2016. The album is named after the day they were formed on the The X Factor. It was later announced that the album's release had been pused back a week to May 27 to keep with the album's theme of 27. The lead single, "Work from Home", which features American singer Ty Dolla Sign was announced the same day and was released on February 26, 2016, along with its music video. The single achieved commercial success, peaking at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 and becoming their highest charting single in the United States, while reaching the top 10 in twenty-two other countries. "7/27" was released on May 27, 2016, debuting at number 4 on the Billboard 200 with 74,000 album-equivalent units (49,000 in pure album sales), making it the group's highest charting album to date. The album also marked the group's first debut in Japan and South Korea, while also managing top 10 peaks in fifteen other countries. The group will embark on The 7/27 Tour starting June 22, 2016, in Lima, Peru, visiting South America, North America and Europe.
Fifth Harmony list Mariah Carey, Whitney Houston, the Spice Girls and Destiny's Child as their main influences.
Fifth Harmony is mainly a pop and R&B girl group. They have described their music as having a "retro feel" to it as well.
Fifth Harmony supports a number of charities and organizations whose initiatives are focused on sponsoring underprivileged teenagers and promoting youth empowerment. In November 2013 they partnered with the Ryan Seacrest Foundation, and visited patients at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. They have also performed for patients at the Children's Hospital Los Angeles. In 2013 Fifth Harmony took part in the Social Media Mania initiative, sponsored by the executive producers of the Teen Choice Awards, which included seminars at high schools on topics such as promoting social media awareness and protecting against the dangers of technology misuse; and two members also shared some of their own experiences as victims of cyber bullying.
Fifth Harmony has a partnership with Girl Scouts of America, performing a number of free concerts for young girls who have participated in various fund-raising and charitable activities for the organisation. Fifth Harmony has performed concerts in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Ohio and Virginia.
The group participated in Goodwill Industries' 2013 Fall Haul Donation Challenge in which schools in Wisconsin and Illinois were encouraged to donate as many items as possible to the charity organization; the school with the most donations won a private live Fifth Harmony performance. It was revealed in January 2014 that Fifth Harmony is the new face of the Aéropostale and Do Something Teens for Jeans campaign. They recorded a public service announcement encouraging community-driven donations of "gently worn" denims to the campaign in aid of homeless teens.
In conjunction with the release of their single "Boss", the group launched a self-esteem campaign in partnership with Do Something called #ImABOSS. The campaign ran from July 9, 2014 to September 9, 2014 and it encouraged young people to make signs for their friends that include a compliment or unique trait of those friends. The purpose of the campaign was stated to be to instill confidence and kindness in the youth. Ally Brooke was quoted as saying "The #ImABoss campaign is exactly in line with our new single Boss because it's all about owning and sharing what makes you confident and strong."
Fifth Harmony were also announced as ambassadors for The Cybersmile Foundation, an anti-cyberbullying initiative, in May 2015. Born prematurely herself, Ally Brooke became a spokesperson for the mother and child health organization March of Dimes in November 2015, in honor of Prematurity Awareness Month and World Prematurity Day. Camila Cabello also partnered with Save The Children to show her care for Syria's children.
In December 2013, Fifth Harmony was revealed as the faces of Jovani Fashions' Prom 2014 line. This included a feature spread in Seventeen and a competition with the prize of having the girl group perform at the winner's high school prom.
On January 30, 2014, Fifth Harmony invited members of the media to The Grammy Museum for a press conference to reveal the group's new multi-year partnership with Mattel's Barbie brand. The girl group recorded a global brand anthem for Barbie, "Anything Is Possible", which they performed at the press conference. The line of dolls, made in each member's likeness, was revealed in November 2014.
In June 2014, Sony Music Entertainment announced that they would be launching endorsement deals between Fifth Harmony and a number of companies, including two clothing lines with Wet Seal. The first clothing line with Wet Seal was launched in August 2014 in 200 stores across America, featuring a collection from each member based on their individual style. Among other licensing agreements signed by Sony Music on behalf of Fifth Harmony were JCorp (apparel), Accessory Innovations (accessories), Brown Trout (posters) and Sky High (back-to-school supplies).
As opening act on Demi Lovato's Neon Lights Tour, Fifth Harmony teamed up with Clean & Clear. The group recorded a series of commercials for the product, which were shown to arenas of concert attendees and later uploaded onto Clean & Clear's YouTube profile. In August 2014, Clean & Clear commercials featuring Fifth Harmony were played on the MTV channel in the run-up to the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards. In 2015, national commercials for Clean & Clear featuring Fifth Harmony began airing on television.
The national television commercial for Hershey's Caramels features Fifth Harmony's single "Worth It". In June 2015, Fifth Harmony were named as the faces of Candie's, a clothing brand stocked exclusively at Kohl's. With this endorsement deal, the girl group became the first one to face the brand since Destiny's Child. Fifth Harmony recorded a jingle and music video for the brand, titled "Rock Your Candie's", which premiered at the 2015 Teen Choice Awards.
Allyson Brooke Hernandez was born in San Antonio, Texas on (1993-07-07) July 7, 1993  to Jerry and Patricia Hernandez. Ally has an older brother named Brandon. She is of Mexican descent.
Ally auditioned for The X Factor in Austin, Texas, singing a track from contemporary Christian and Latin pop singer Jaci Velasquez. During a recap of Season 2 of the X Factor, the Huffington Post described her audition as one of the highlights of the season, stating that "it was a quiet but controlled performance, hitting some amazing grace notes".
Normani Kordei Hamilton was born in Atlanta, Georgia on (1996-05-31) May 31, 1996  to parents Derrick and Andrea Hamilton. She spent her early years in New Orleans. Her family relocated to Houston, Texas after Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Normani has two older half-sisters, Arielle and Ashlee. Hamilton has been performing since she was three, and was an award-winning dancer and gymnast before recording her first single at age 13. She has also had a small role in the HBO series Treme.
Hamilton considered herself a soul and gospel singer until she was incorporated in a girl group. Before The X Factor, she competed in the Miss Texas competition and made it to the final but decided to audition for the reality music competition. Like most of the other members, Hamilton's first bootcamp wasn't shown. She credits Beyoncé as her main artistic influence.
Lauren Michelle Jauregui was born in Miami, Florida on (1996-06-27) June 27, 1996  to Michael and Clara Jauregui. She has two siblings; Taylor and Chris. Jauregui is of Cuban descent. She mentions Journey, Paramore, The Script, Alicia Keys, and Christina Aguilera as her influences. She attended Carrollton School of the Sacred Heart since 7th grade.
At 16, Jauregui auditioned for The X Factor in Greensboro, North Carolina with the song "If I Ain't Got You" by Alicia Keys. She was given four "yeses" and allowed to move on to bootcamp. She was then eliminated, but later was brought back to form what is now Fifth Harmony.
Karla Camila Cabello was born in Cuba on (1997-03-03) March 3, 1997  to Alejandro and Sinuhe Cabello. She has a sister named Sofía. Her father is a Mexican and her mother is a Cuban. By the time she was five years old Cabello had lived in Havana and Mexico, before permanently relocating to Miami, Florida. While growing up she listened to Hispanic artists such as Celia Cruz and Alejandro Fernandez.
Cabello auditioned for The X Factor in North Carolina. She first auditioned for the producers' part of the audition and got the call back saying that she will audition for the judges as an alternative, meaning that if after the show, if they were to have time, she would be able to audition. After her audition, she got a 'yes' from all four judges. After elimination during bootcamp, Cabello was called back to the stage along with four other female contestants to form the girl group that would later become known as Fifth Harmony.
In November 2015 Cabello released a duet with Canadian singer Shawn Mendes titled "I Know What You Did Last Summer". The song has charted at number 20 in the US and 18 in Canada. It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America.
Dinah Jane Hansen was born in Santa Ana, California on (1997-06-22) June 22, 1997  to parents Gordon and Milika Fot'aika. She is the oldest of six siblings. She is of Polynesian, Tongan and Danish descent. Hansen auditioned for The X Factor singing "If I Were a Boy" by Beyoncé, during which L.A. Reid stated that she "took the song to places that even Beyoncé didn't". She cites Ciara, Beyoncé, Leona Lewis, Mariah Carey and Etta James as her musical influences.
During the final round of bootcamp, Hansen sang "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)" by Kelly Clarkson with another contestant. She forgot part of the song throughout the performance. Due to this, Hansen was eliminated as a solo performer, but was later brought back into the competition to form Fifth Harmony.
In 2015, Hansen was considered for the role of the main character in the then-upcoming film Moana. The role eventually went to Auli'i Cravalho.
Reflection (2015)
7/27 (2016)
List of awards and nominations received by Fifth Harmony
List of Epic Records artists
List of The X Factor finalists (U.S. season 2)
List of girl groups
Syco Music
