Umskiptar (Old Norse for Metamorphosis) is the ninth studio album by the Norwegian one-man band Burzum, released on 21 May 2012 through Byelobog Productions. It has been described by Varg Vikernes as a "return to the roots", with a priority on atmosphere. The album's lyrics are taken from an Old Norse poem entitled Völuspá. The album was leaked two months before its release date, due, according to Vikernes, to a former PR agent of his having "sent promotional copies of the entire album to left wing extremist magazines" without his knowledge or consent.
The cover art is taken from the painting Nótt by Norwegian painter Peter Nicolai Arbo.
Despite featuring "a stripped-down" viking metal sound that "pays homage" to the likes of Bathory and early Enslaved, Umspkiptar retains "the fuzzy riffing and low production values" of Burzum's previous black metal releases. SputnikMusic's Kyle Ward described the album's style as "an odd bastardization of the usual black metal sound." The album also rarely features harsh vocals.
The track "Alfadanz" features a "submerged" piano intro and repeating simple riffs. "Gullaldr" is a ten-minute-long spoken word track, overlaid with guitar plucking. "Níðhöggr" finds Vikernes whispering over field recordings, a bass drum, and a "distant, wobbly tone." The vocals are buried "between sheets of black-metal guitar screech" on the track "Heiðr," while "Valgaldr", is described as "an eight-minute bog in which he wraps ghoulish harmonies around distorted riffs," with a sound compared to "Iron Maiden on Thorazine."
The album generally received negative reviews from music critics. Metal Storm's staff critic Troy Killjoy wrote: "Rather than beautifully composed epic melodious black metal anthems, encouraging atmospheric tales of fantasy and historical wars, or even the traditional grim and frostbitten stylings of the second wave (of which Burzum was a significant part), Varg presents the world with his least imaginative work to date - even taking Dauði Baldrs into consideration." Pitchfork critic Grayson Currin thought that Umskiptar, along with the compilation album From the Depths of Darkness, shows that Vikernes' "string of interesting-to-important records has now faded into such formless, hapless bullshit that even Odin likely doesn't care." SputnikMusic's Kyle Ward described the album as "a suffocating release in the worst sense." Ward further explained: "It allows you no room to breathe and holds its grip until you can no longer bear it and simply succumb."
Album personnel as adapted from official Burzum website.
Varg Vikernes – vocals, all instruments, production, design, layout
Pytten – production, mixing
Davide Bertolini – production
Naweed – mastering
Dan Capp – design, layout
