Jack Sherman (born January 18, 1956) is a guitarist best known as a member of the Red Hot Chili Peppers, playing on their debut album.
Sherman joined the Chili Peppers in December 1983 replacing founding member, Hillel Slovak. Sherman would remain with the band for their first tour in 1984 to support the release of the first album. He co-composed material on the debut album as well as songs on the follow-up record, Freaky Styley. Slovak returned to the band, replacing Sherman in early 1985.
He has recorded with Solomon Burke, T. Bone Burnett, Jorge Calderon, Peter Case, Ed Cherney, Merry Clayton, George Clinton, Steve Churchyard, Todd Cochran, Jennifer Condos, Eric Culberson, Paul Dieter, Tim Drummond, Charles Duncan, Bob Dylan, Kenny Edwards, Howie Epstein, Jeff Eyrich, Keith Forsey, Bob Glaub, Gerry Goffin, Barry Goldberg, Sheldon Gomberg, Don Heffington, Nawfel Hermi, Billy Idol, James Jamerson, Jr., Dave Jerden, Booker T. Jones, Steve Jordan, Tonio K, Jim Keltner, David Kemper, Al Kooper, Danny Kortchmar, Russ Kunkel, Greg Ladanyi, Phil Lee, Greg Leisz, Gary Mallaber, George Marinelli, Randall Marsh, Cliff Martinez, Reggie McBride, Johnette Napolitano, Ivan Neville, Jeff Porcaro, Raymond Pounds, Charlie Quintana, Julianna Raye, Kimm Rogers, Shandi Sinnamon, Feargal Sharkey, Leland Sklar, Fran Smith, Jr., Steven Soles, Micki Steele (Bangles), Gregg Sutton, Benmont Tench, Bruce Thomas, Danny Timms, Tanya Tucker, David Uosikkinen, and others.
Sherman has toured/performed on stage with All Night, Andy & The Rattlesnakes, Freddie Beckmeier, Toni Childs, Jennifer Condos, Glenn Cornick, Jody Cortez, Eric Culberson, Charles Duncan, Howie Epstein, Sheldon Gomberg, John Hiatt, Cliff Hugo, James "Hutch" Hutchinson, Tonio K (opening for The Kinks), Phil Lee, Gary Mallaber, Cliff Martinez, Blackbyrd McKnight, George Marinelli, Luke Mitchell, P-Funk, Julianna Raye, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Kimm Rogers, Katey Sagal, Hunt Sales and the Big 9, Charlie Sexton, Bert Sommer, Ike Stubblefield, Mick Taylor, Toni and the Movers, David Uosikkinen, Bobby Whitlock, etc.
Sherman resides and performs in Savannah, Georgia since July 10, 2003.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers were announced as 2012 inductees into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and despite performing on the band's debut record, Sherman was not inducted with them, he claimed this as unfair and also claimed that he deserved to be inducted, a decision made by the Hall of Fame and their advisors.
Sherman spoke out about the band's induction blaming the band for not including him or former guitarist Dave Navarro by saying he was told only original members, current members and those who played on multiple albums were eligible for induction. "It appeared to be a politically correct way of omitting Dave Navarro and I for whatever reasons they have that are probably the band's and not the Hall's," Sherman also said "It's really painful to see all this celebrating going on and be excluded. I'm not claiming that I've brought anything other to the band... but to have soldiered on under arduous conditions to try to make the thing work, and I think that's what you do in a job, looking back. And that's been dishonored. I'm being dishonored, and it sucks."
1984 The Red Hot Chili Peppers – Red Hot Chili Peppers
1986 Knocked Out Loaded – Bob Dylan
1986 R&B Skeletons in the Closet – George Clinton
1986 Echo Park Soundtrack
1988 Notes from the Lost Civilization – Tonio K
1988 Wish – Feargal Sharkey
1988 The Abbey Road E.P. – Red Hot Chili Peppers
1989 The Man with the Blue Post-Modern Fragmented Neo-Traditionalist Guitar- Peter Case
1990 Soundtrack of My Life – Kimm Rogers
1990 Flashback soundtrack
1992 What Hits!? – Red Hot Chili Peppers
1995 Chillin' In Hades - Bill Madden
1996 Backroom Blood – Gerry Goffin
1997 Olé – Tonio K
1998 Under the Covers: Essential Red Hot Chili Peppers – Red Hot Chili Peppers
2000 In from the Cold – In From The Cold {Original music with Gary Mallaber and Maria Sebastian}
2007 Luke Mitchell – High Expectations
2010 Eric Culberson – In The Outside
2011 Luke Mitchell – Row Boat Row
2013 Matthew Wesley – REAL
