Ace Frehley is a 1978 solo album from Ace Frehley, the lead guitarist of American hard rock band Kiss. It was one of four solo albums released by the members of Kiss on September 18, 1978.
The album featured Anton Fig on drums. He later performed session work on the Kiss albums Dynasty and Unmasked, and became a member of Ace Frehley's band Frehley's Comet. Fig and Will Lee, who played bass on three of the album's tracks, later gained international prominence as members of the World's Most Dangerous Band and the CBS Orchestra along with Paul Shaffer on Late Night with David Letterman and Late Show with David Letterman. In an interview with Loudwire, Frehley stated that some of the songs from his solo album were originally slated for the fifth Kiss album, Rock and Roll Over.
"New York Groove", which was first recorded in 1975 by British glam rock band Hello, rose to No. 13 on the US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart. This was the highest chart placement for any of the singles released from the 1978 solo albums. The album reached No. 26 on the US Billboard 200 album chart. It was certified platinum on October 2, 1978 and shipped over 1,000,000 copies. It is also the highest selling of the four KISS solo albums.
Allmusic rated the album 4 stars out of 5 and said, "Of the four Kiss solo albums, the best of the bunch is Ace Frehley's". Jason Josephes of Pitchfork concurred that it was the standout of the Kiss solo efforts, describing it as "a melange of riff rock, power pop, and just a little bit of soul".
All songs written and composed by Ace Frehley, except for where noted. 
Ace Frehley – lead and backing vocals, lead and rhythm guitar, acoustic guitar, guitar synthesizer, bass guitar
Anton Fig – drums, percussion
Will Lee – bass guitar on "Ozone", "I'm in Need of Love" and "Wiped-Out"
Carl Tallarico – drums on "Fractured Mirror"
David Lasley and Susan Collins – backing vocals on "Speedin' Back to My Baby", "What's on Your Mind?" and "New York Groove"
Larry Kelly – backing vocals on "Rip It Out"
Bill "Bear" Scheniman – bell on "Fractured Mirror"
Bobby McAdams – power mouth (talk box) on "New York Groove"
Mastered by George Marino at Sterling Sound, NYC
Album design by Dennis Woloch
Album artwork by Eraldo Carugati
