Miroslav Kostadinov (Bulgarian: Мирослав Костадинов born 10 March 1976) is a Bulgarian singer and songwriter who represented Bulgaria in the Eurovision Song Contest 2010 with the song "Angel si ti". He is the son of the famous painter, writer, composer, director and singer Miroslav Adinov, whose story is told by the biographer Jim Wildcat in "Miroslav Adinov : the man, the legend".
Miroslav Kostadinov, better known as Miro, was a member of the Bulgarian duet KariZma. Born in Dobrich, Bulgaria Kostadinov began playing the piano the moment he sat in front of a musical instrument. Years later, he decided to take his talents to a new level and joined an amateur singing group. After receiving numerous awards from various festivals, he collaborated with many of his friends who were also well-known musicians. Miro has been in the music industry for 16 years and has already won two prestigious awards in Varna Discovery. He has also been invited to perform in Turkey and Kazakhstan, where his songs blew everyone away, including the jury. Later he became part of KariZma, which went on to become one of the most popular Bulgarian duets. In 2007, he recorded his first two songs as a solo musician. They were entitled "Ever Before" and "Lose Control", the latter being the first single in his debut solo record Omirotvoren.
Bulgaria decided not to use a multi-heat selection system of previous years and select their artist internally. A panel of 51 music experts voted for a number of candidates with Miroslav Kostadinov the winner with 10 votes, followed Poli Genova with 7 and Nora in third place with 3. Other artists in the running were Slavi Trifonov, Maria Ilieva, Lili Ivanova, Elitsa Todorova and Stoyan Yankoulov, the 2007 Bulgarian representatives.
A national final was organized, where Miroslav Kostadinov performed five songs, written especially for him in five different music genres ranging from ethno to rock. The winning song, selected by televote, was "Angel si ti". It was performed on the second semifinal on 27 May, and did not qualify to the final.
Рискувам да те имам (Riskuvam da te imam)
Колко ми липсваш (Kolko mi lipsvash)
Ще избягам ли от теб? (Shte izbiagam li ot teb?)
Mr.Killer
Минаваш през мен (Minavash prez men)
All In Love (Ne sega)
Някога преди (Niakoga predi)
Завинаги (Zavinagi) feat. Anelia
Nirvana feat. Mike Johnson (2-4 family)
Губя контрол, когато (Gubia kontrol, kogato REMIX)
В едно огледало (V edno ogledalo) feat. Krum
Август е септември (Avgust e septemvri)
Убиваме с любов (Ubivame s lubov)
Ангел си ти (Angel si ti)
Mil Amantes feat. Feminnem and Sir Jam
POWER
2007 - Most Elegant Male
2008 - Fan TV award for Best Male Artist
2008 - Planeta TV award for Best Song ("Zavinagi" feat. Anelia)
2008 - Planeta TV award for Best Video ("Zavinagi" feat. Anelia)
2008 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Lyrics ("Niakoga predi")
2008 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Video ("Niakoga predi")
2008 - Nov folk Music Awards - Best Duet ("Zavinagi")
2008 - Romantika Radio - Best Song ("Zavinagi")
2008 - "Sing with me" reality show - 1st place (with Divna)
2009 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Male Artist
2009 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Song ("Gubia kontrol, kogato")
2009 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Album ("Omirotvoren")
2009 - Mad Video Music Awards - Best Bulgarian Video ("Gubia kontrol, kogato REMIX")
2010 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Male Artist
2010 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Song ("Ubivame s lubov")
2010 - BG Radio Music Awards - Best Video ("Ubivame s lubov")
