Liebe ist für alle da (English: Love is for everyone) is the sixth studio album by German Neue Deutsche Härte band Rammstein, which was released in most of Europe on October 16, 2009, the United Kingdom on October 19, 2009, and the United States on October 20, 2009. The album sold 679,500 copies worldwide until February 2010.
The album title was confirmed on September 1, 2009, in a promotional video for the new single, "Pussy", released on September 18, 2009, in the European Union and September 19, 2009, in the United States. The single's B-side is "Rammlied".
The video for "Pussy" was released on adult website Visit-X, two days before the single. The video features scenes of explicit male and female nudity as well as the band members (played by body doubles in the nude scenes) engaging in sexual activity with women.
In July 2009, a promo version of the title track, "Liebe ist für alle da", leaked onto the internet, along with various promotional materials.
As of October 16, 2009, pictures taken throughout the recording of the album are available on Rammstein's official website.
The album was released on October 16, 2009, in Europe and October 20 in the U.S. It became platinum in Finland before its release, solely from pre-release sales. It debuted at number 3 in the French charts, making it Rammstein's most commercially successful album in France to date. Furthermore, the album entered at number 13 on the US charts, making it Rammstein's highest-charting album in the United States, although it subsequently fell off the US albums chart after four weeks. In Germany, the album entered the charts at number 1 after the best start of a music album in 2009 and beating popular German R&B-singer Xavier Naidoo's new album "Alles kann besser werden". It remained high in the charts until it was censored.
According to Richard Z. Kruspe, "B********" does not stand for "Bastard", but for "Bückstabü", a word made up by the band to mean "whatever you want".
Paul H. Landers stated that tracks which did not make it on the album would appear as B-sides on singles and that there would be a special edition of the album with five bonus tracks.
The song "Frühling in Paris" features lyrics from the song "Non, je ne regrette rien" by Edith Piaf.
On November 8, 2009, Rammstein played their first show for their "Liebe ist für alle da" tour in Lisbon, Portugal, their first live show in four years.
As announced, a video was shot for the album's third single, "Haifisch", which premiered on the band's MySpace page on April 23, 2010.
"Waidmanns Heil" is a playable track in the rhythm video game Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock.
In 2013, the song "Führe mich" was featured in Lars von Trier's film Nymphomaniac.
The album was added to the index of the Bundesprüfstelle für jugendgefährdende Medien (Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons) in Germany, due to the track "Ich tu dir weh" and a picture inside the album booklet displaying Richard Kruspe spanking a nude woman. This means only adults can purchase the album; additionally, it must not be displayed in stores where minors have access (see BPjM for details). As a consequence, the album was re-released in Germany on November 16 in an edited version without the censored track and picture. The band still played the instrumental version song live in Germany until it was ultimately banned from live performances.
Despite the censorship, the video to "Ich tu dir weh" was released on December 21, 2009, on adult website Visit-X, just like the video to "Pussy", after advertisement on the band's official German website. Any references have since been deleted, presumably following German law prohibiting advertisement for media on the index. In Europe, a single was released on February 5, 2010, and in the UK on February 15, 2010.
As of May 31, 2010, the administrative court in Cologne has decided to waive the suspensive effect of censorship (case 22 L 1899/09). The German department deleted the record from the censorship lists on June 1 (Decision No. A 117/10). On June 9 the band announced on their official website that the original version of the album was already available at their shop and that a release of the single "Ich tu dir weh" in Germany was planned in a short period of time.
All songs written and composed by Rammstein. 
Also released as a double 12" vinyl and a limited edition double 12" pink vinyl (side A = 1–3; B = 4–6; C = 7–9; D = 10–11).
The second track, "Ich tu dir weh", is replaced by four seconds of silence on the censored version of the album in Germany. It is marked on the case as Ich tu dir weh*. *Entfernt nach Zensur durch die Behörden der Bundesrepublik Deutschland (Removed after censorship by the authorities of the Federal Republic of Germany).
According to Richard Z. Kruspe, "B********" does not stand for "Bastard", but for "Bückstabü", a word made up by the band to mean whatever you want it to.
All songs written and composed by Rammstein. 
A limited edition deluxe box set, released on December 21, 2009, features the Special Edition album (either censored or uncensored), handcuffs, lubricant and six dildos, all within an aluminium flight case.
The Japanese edition, released in December 2009, comes as a double SHM-CD.
Placed after "Roter Sand" on the standard edition and after "Liese" on the special edition.
Rammstein
Till Lindemann – lead vocals
Richard Z. Kruspe – lead guitar, backing vocals
Paul H. Landers – rhythm guitar, backing vocals
Oliver "Ollie" Riedel – bass guitar
Christoph "Doom" Schneider – drums
Christian "Flake" Lorenz – keyboards
Production
Produced by Jacob Hellner
