Kenneth Thomas "Kenney" Jones (born 16 September 1948) is a veteran English musician and drummer best known for his work in the groups The Small Faces, The Faces and then The Who, after Keith Moon's death in 1978. Jones was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2012 as a member of The Small Faces/Faces.
Having previously been in a band with Ronnie Lane, Jones was one of the founding members of the English rock group, the Small Faces. Active from 1965 to 1969, Small Faces were part of the Mod revolution of the 1960s. Their hits included "All or Nothing", "Sha-La-La-La-Lee", "Itchycoo Park" and "Tin Soldier". Small Faces have been cited as a major influence on musicians for the past 35 years, including Paul Weller and Noel Gallagher.
In 2007, the Small Faces were honoured by Westminster Council with a commemorative plaque placed at what was Don Arden's offices in Carnaby Street, the band's "spiritual home". Jones himself unveiled the plaque. In a BBC interview Jones said: "To honour the Small Faces after all these years is a terrific achievement. I only wish that Steve Marriott, Ronnie Lane and Don Arden were here to enjoy this moment with me". Since the death of Ian McLagan in December 2014, Jones is the sole surviving member of the Small Faces.
In 2004 The Observer listed the Small Faces' 1968 release Ogdens' Nut Gone Flake one of the "top British albums of all time".
After the departure of lead singer/guitarist Steve Marriott in 1969, the group recruited singer Rod Stewart and guitarist Ronnie Wood to replace Marriott. Both were formerly from the Jeff Beck Group. The band changed its name to the Faces, as the original name was associated with the small stature of its members, and Stewart and Wood did not fit the description. Jones remained with the band until its dissolution in late 1975, recording four studio albums and a live album with them.
In November 1978, Jones was invited by guitarist Pete Townshend and manager Bill Curbishley to join The Who, replacing their original drummer Keith Moon, who had died on 7 September 1978 of a Heminevrin overdose at the age of 32. He was invited, in part, because the band had been friendly with him from his days with the Small Faces (he and Moon were friends and were together on the last night of Moon's life in 1978, as part of the viewing party put together by Paul McCartney, for The Buddy Holly Story), and because he had played with Townshend, Roger Daltrey and John Entwistle on the Tommy soundtrack. He played on the albums Face Dances and It's Hard and also played on the soundtrack for Daltrey's film McVicar, as well as on the band's tours from 1979 to 1982. Jones played with the band at Live Aid in 1985. Jones' final appearance as a regular member of the Who was when the group received a lifetime achievement award at the 1988 British Phonographic Industry awards ceremony. He was frequently at odds with Daltrey, who felt that Jones' drumming style was not right for the band. Jones was replaced by Simon Phillips for the Who's 1989 reunion tour. In an April 2011 special edition of Uncut magazine, Townshend said that Jones was a good choice for the band.
Kenney Jones reunited with The Who on 14 June 2014 at the Rock n Horsepower benefit concert held at his Hurtwood Polo Club. The band performed for an event set up by Jones to benefit Prostate Cancer UK, an organization that promotes awareness of the disease that Jones has. It was the first time that he had appeared onstage with Townshend and Daltrey since 1988. Sharing the bill were contemporaries such as Jeff Beck, Procol Harum, and Mike Rutherford.
Jones formed partnerships with former Free, Bad Company, and The Firm singer Paul Rodgers in the early 1990s, forming a band called the Law.
In 2001, Jones formed a new band; over several months, the line-up solidified to include Rick Wills and Robert Hart. In 2005, The Jones Gang released their debut album, Any Day Now.
Jones has guested as drummer on many recording sessions, which included appearances on albums by Rod Stewart, the Rolling Stones, Ronnie Wood, Roger Daltrey, Andy Fairweather-Low, Joan Armatrading, Keith Moon, Marsha Hunt, Mike Batt, Pete Townshend, Chuck Berry, Jerry Lee Lewis, David Essex, John Lodge, and Wings, He was also on a Top of the Pops performance with Status Quo, performing their 1986 hit single, "Red Sky".
Outside of music, Jones is a passionate fan of polo. He has become an accomplished polo player and is the owner of Hurtwood Park Polo Club, in Ewhurst, Surrey.
On behalf of Small Faces and in memory of his late colleagues Steve Marriott and Ronnie Lane, Jones established a children's charity, the 'Small Faces Charitable Trust', in 1999.
Jones is a supporter of the Conservative Party, and recorded a song called "Mr Brown" written by Robert Hart, criticising the tax policies of the then Chancellor of Exchequer Gordon Brown. He has also performed in support of the Countryside Alliance, an organisation which promotes rural issues such as fox hunting.
Jones has six children: Dylan (1972), Jesse (1977), Casey (1987), Jay (1989), Cody (1994) and Erin (1997).
He is married to the former model Jayne Andrew, the mother of four of his children. His parents were Samuel (died 1996) and Violet Jones (died 19 September 2013). Violet lived in Stepney, East London, until her death. He was very close to his mum and was devastated by her death. Kenney Jones currently lives in Ewhurst, Surrey, England, with his family.
Jones was diagnosed with prostate cancer in September 2013, but he has since overcome the disease due to some "magic beads".
