Neue Deutsche Welle (NDW, pronounced [ˈnɔʏə ˈdɔʏtʃə ˈvɛlə]; "New German Wave") is a genre of German music originally derived from post-punk and new wave music with electronic influences. The term "Neue Deutsche Welle" was first used in a record shop advertisement by Burkhardt Seiler in the German magazine Sounds in August 1979, and then coined by journalist Alfred Hilsberg whose article about the movement titled "Neue Deutsche Welle — Aus grauer Städte Mauern" ("New German Wave — From Grey Cities' Walls") was published in Sounds in October 1979.
The history of the Neue Deutsche Welle consists of two major parts. From its beginnings to 1981, the Neue Deutsche Welle was mostly an underground movement with roots in British punk and new wave music; it quickly developed into an original and distinct style, influenced in no small part by the different sound and rhythm of the German language which many of the bands had adapted from early on. Whilst some of the lyrics of artists like Nena and Ideal epitomized the Zeitgeist of urban West Germany during the Cold War, others used the language in a surreal way, merely playing with the sound or graphic quality of the language rather than using it to express meaning, as done by bands and artists like Spliff, Joachim Witt and Trio.
The main centers of the NDW movement during these years were Berlin, Düsseldorf, Hamburg, Hannover and Hagen as well as, to a lesser extent, the Frankfurt Rhein-Main Region, Limburg an der Lahn and Vienna (Austria).
From about 1980 on, the music industry began noticing the Neue Deutsche Welle; however, due to the idiosyncratic nature of the music, the focus shifted to creating new bands more compatible with the mainstream, rather than promoting existing bands. Many one-hit wonders and short-lived bands appeared and were forgotten again in rapid succession, and the overly broad application of the "NDW" label to these bands as well as to almost any German musicians not using English lyrics, even if their music was apparently not influenced at all by the 'original' NDW (including pure rock bands like BAP or even Udo Lindenberg) quickly led to the decay of the entire genre when many of the original musicians turned their backs in frustration.
Around 1983/1984, the era of the Neue Deutsche Welle came to an early end, following the oversaturation of the market with what was perceived as stereotypical, manufactured hits.
A revival of interest in the style in the Anglophone world occurred in 2003, with the release of DJ Hell's compilation New Deutsch. The NDW has come to be acknowledged as a forerunner to later developments in dance-punk, electronic body music, and electroclash.
In the 2000s, the term is being used by the Berlin-based rap label Aggro Berlin to describe a supposed new German rap movement that they claim to be a part of. This was the subject of Aggro-signed Fler in his 2005 single Neue Deutsche Welle.
Abwärts
Andi Arroganti
Andreas Dorau
Andy Giorbino
Carambolage
Daälbers
Deutsch Amerikanische Freundschaft / DAF
DIN A Testbild
Duotronic Synterror
Einstürzende Neubauten
Familie Hesselbach
Fehlfarben
Foyer des arts
Front
FSK (Freiwillige Selbstkontrolle)
Geile Tiere
Geisterfahrer
Große Freiheit
Grauzone
Hans-A-Plast
Holger Hiller
Ja Ja Ja
KeinMenscH!
Der KFC
Die Klopferbande
Kosmonautentraum
Kowalski
Die Krupps
Liaisons Dangereuses
Malaria!
Male
Mania D
Mittagspause
Der Moderne Man
Mythen in Tüten
Neonbabies
Östro 430
Palais Schaumburg
Der Plan
Pyrolator
Die Radierer
Rheingold
Saal 2
Stahlnetz
Stratis
S.Y.P.H.
Sprung Aus Den Wolken
Die Tödliche Doris
Tommi Stumpff
Trümmerfrauen
Die Unbekannten
The Wirtschaftswunder
X-Mal Deutschland
Die Zimmermänner
Note: Many of the underground groups were commercially successful; the dichotomy between underground and commercial NDW-groups has more to do with differences in sound, presentation and attitude.
Bärchen und die Milchbubis
Boys in Trouble
Combo Colossale
D.E.F.
DÖF ("Deutsch-österreichisches Feingefühl": Joesi Prokopetz, Manfred Tauchen, Annette Humpe)
Extrabreit
Falco
Felix De Luxe
Fräulein Menke
Gänsehaut
Ideal
Insisters
Ixi
Geier Sturzflug
Hubert Kah
Jawoll
Joachim Witt
KIZ
Klaus Nomi
Markus
Münchener Freiheit
Nena
Nichts
Nina Hagen
Paso Doble
Peter Schilling
Spider Murphy Gang
Spliff
Steinwolke
Trio - preferred the label Neue Deutsche Fröhlichkeit ("New German Cheerfulness") to describe their music.
UKW
United Balls
Coldwave
Dance-punk
Electropunk
Neue Deutsche Härte
Neue Deutsche Todeskunst
