One Day Remains is the debut studio album by the American rock band Alter Bridge, released on August 10, 2004 on Wind-up Records. The album was produced by Ben Grosse. It has been certified Gold in the United States with worldwide sales reaching 750,000. It is said the album received its name from the band members' attitudes that life should be lived as if only one day remains. Guitarist Mark Tremonti also said in an interview that the title is a reference to the title cards that appeared in the movie Donnie Darko, and it is one of the names the band considered using before settling with Alter Bridge.
All songs written and composed by Mark Tremonti, Myles Kennedy, Brian Marshall, and Scott Phillips. 
Although never released as a single, "In Loving Memory" is one of the band's most popular songs among fans and is performed frequently in concert. On November 5, 2008 in Glasgow, an electric version of the song was performed for the first time, and has since become a regular feature in their live shows.
Mark Tremonti wrote the song about the death of his mother, Mary Elizabeth Tremonti. In an interview he said: "There are a lot of themes on this record that are very personal, for example 'In Loving Memory' is about my mother who recently passed away. In terms of purely personal significance, you cannot get any deeper than that. It is definitely a sad song.". In Loving Memory was used as a WWE tribute to Eddie Guerrero on an episode of WWE RAW on 14 November 2005, one day after his death.
Like "In Loving Memory," "Metalingus" was never a single but it is one of the band's most popular songs and is a live staple. The song was used by WWE Superstar Edge as his entrance theme from 2004 until his retirement in 2011. The song is well known for its aggressive heavy sound, which foreshadowed the band going in a heavier metal sound on their later albums.
"Save Me" (3:31), featured on the Elektra soundtrack.
"On My Way Now" was an acoustic song they had written, but it was never recorded. It was performed only once in Indianapolis, Indiana. Mark Tremonti used the intro to the song on his instructional DVD The Sound and the Story for an alternate tuning and finger-picking lesson.
"Solace" has been recorded during the ODR sessions, but it didn't make the record. The song "Solace" was a possible band name they were seriously considering before deciding on Alter Bridge. The lead guitarist Mark Tremonti said that in the guitar one interview from the October 2004 issue, Myles was singing a line from it. The line was "I'll find a way". The song has yet to be heard.
"Breathe" is another song written during the ODR sessions, "Breathe" has been recorded, but "it's just sitting in the vault" according to the lead singer and rhythm guitarist Myles Kennedy. It has yet to be heard.
"Cruel Sun" is an unrecorded song written during the ODR sessions. It has yet to be heard.
Alter Bridge
Myles Kennedy — vocals
Mark Tremonti — guitars, additional vocals
Brian Marshall — bass guitar
Scott Phillips — drums, percussion
Production
Ben Grosse — production, mixing
Tom Baker — mastering
