Canadian singer-songwriter Avril Lavigne has released 5 studio albums, 8 extended plays, 23 singles, and 23 music videos, and she has appeared on several movie soundtracks and charity albums.
Lavigne's debut studio album, Let Go, was released in June 2002 and peaked at number two on the US Billboard 200 in the United States. It has sold over 20 million copies worldwide and is certified six-times platinum in the United States. The album's lead single, "Complicated", peaked at number one in Australia and at number two in the United States. Its subsequent single releasess, "Sk8er Boi" and "I'm with You", became worldwide top ten hits.
In May 2004, Lavigne released her second studio album, Under My Skin, which debuted at number one in Australia, Mexico, Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and went on to sell more than 12 million copies worldwide. "My Happy Ending", the second and most successful single from the album, peaking at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100 and selling 1.2 million copies in the United States. In 2007, her third studio album, The Best Damn Thing, was released. It was her second album to debut at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart and has produced Lavigne's most successful single, "Girlfriend". The song became her first number one hit on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, and subsequently became her best-selling single in that region with 3.8 million copies sold. The song also peaked at number one on the other record charts of several nations, including Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Europe. Totally, "Girlfriend" became the worldwide best-selling single of 2007, with 7.3 million copies sold. The album's second single, "When You're Gone", was a top-forty hit in the United States, and it reached the top ten in Australia, Canada, Sweden, and the United Kingdom.The Best Damn Thing has sold more than 8M copies worldwide as of 2008.
In March 2011, Lavigne released her fourth studio album, Goodbye Lullaby. It was preceded by its lead single, "What the Hell", which peaked at number eleven on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart and has sold 2.1 million copies in the United States. The album's second single, "Smile", was released in May 2011, and its third, "Wish You Were Here", was released later in September. In November 2013, Lavigne released her fifth studio album, Avril Lavigne. Its lead single, "Here's to Never Growing Up", had moderate success peaking inside the top 20 in Australia, Canada, Ireland, the United Kingdom, and the United States, selling 1.3 million copies in the United States. The album spawned four more singles: "Rock n Roll", "Let Me Go", "Hello Kitty" and "Give You What You Like".
Lavigne has written songs for several film soundtracks, including those of American Wedding and Sweet Home Alabama. Two songs that she originally wrote for films were included on subsequent studio albums. "Keep Holding On", written for Eragon, appeared on The Best Damn Thing, and "Alice", written for Alice in Wonderland, appeared on Goodbye Lullaby. To date, Lavigne has sold 12.4 million albums in the United States. Worldwide, those figures have increased to over 35 million albums and over 50 million singles sold.
List of songs written and performed by Avril Lavigne
