Simon Fuller (born 17 May 1960) is an English entrepreneur, artist manager and television producer. He is best known for being the creator of the Idol franchise, which was first seen in the UK under the name Pop Idol, and includes American Idol in the U.S. Fuller is the executive producer of many other hit shows including the Fox TV reality shows So You Think You Can Dance and Q'Viva.
Fuller came to prominence through managing pop group the Spice Girls. He has managed a wide range of talent that includes David and Victoria Beckham, Annie Lennox, Sir Bradley Wiggins, Steven Tyler, Lewis Hamilton, Andy Murray, Amy Winehouse, Carrie Underwood, Kelly Clarkson, Will Young, Emma Bunton, Lisa Marie Presley, Gary Barlow, Cathy Dennis, Aloe Blacc, Steve McManaman and others. He is in partnership with the duo Jennifer Lopez and Marc Anthony.
In 2007, Time magazine named Fuller one of the 100 most influential people in the world. In 2008, Fuller was certified as the most successful British music manager of all time by Billboard magazine. Fuller received the 2,441st star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on 23 May 2011. The 2014 Sunday Times Rich List values Fuller at £375m; the sixth richest music millionaire in Britain. In the Daily Mail music promoter Harvey Goldsmith ranked Fuller at No.1 in a list of the greatest British entrepreneurs, commenting "he is a man of real vision".
Fuller began his career in 1981 at Chrysalis in A&R (Chrysalis Records) in the UK, where he signed Madonna's first hit 'Holiday' to the company. He started his own management company in London in 1985, 19 Entertainment, eventually selling the business to CKX, Inc. in a cash and stock deal worth over $200 million in March 2005. In 2008 the company delivered a profit of $92.5 million (£66m) into the parent company. Fuller became a director of CKX, a position which gave him creative control over all of CKX's assets including the Elvis Presley Estate, Muhammad Ali’s business interests, and other iconic rights properties, until January 2010 when he started a new firm, XIX Entertainment, while continuing to work with CKX/19 as a consultant and executive producer. XIX Entertainment has a valuation of $100 million, and has offices in London, Los Angeles, Nashville and New York City.
In February 2008 Fuller was presented with the PGA Award by the Producers Guild of America in Hollywood. At the event he was praised for his creativity, entrepreneurship, and charity work by British Prime Minister Gordon Brown and HRH The Prince of Wales who also thanked Fuller for his support of the Prince's charity The Prince's Trust.
Fuller has created several hit TV formats including S Club 7, a pop group and BBC/Fox Kids television show, which was broadcast in over 100 territories around the world. S Club has been named as the inspiration for the wave of teen-oriented musical television shows that followed most notably Glee and High School Musical. The S Club project produced several stars including Rachel Stevens, Jon Lee, Holly Willoughby, Ben Barnes, as well as Frankie Sandford and Rochelle Wiseman of The Saturdays.
In 2001, Fuller created the British television show Pop Idol. The show broke TV records when it was broadcast over two series in the UK, as well as uncovering Will Young whose single Evergreen became the ‘biggest selling single of the century’ in the UK. Fuller sold the show to the Fox network in the US, and American Idol quickly became a No.1 rated show. The show has made stars of its presenter Ryan Seacrest as well as judges Randy Jackson, Paula Abdul and Simon Cowell, as well as many of its performers. And later the show has featured many more high profiled judges including Ellen DeGeneres, Kara DioGuardi, Steven Tyler, Jennifer Lopez, Nicki Minaj, Mariah Carey, and Keith Urban.
American Idol has since won many awards and has been credited with originating a new form of reality TV. It is claimed to be the most valuable TV format in the world with a value of over $8 billion made up of revenue from sponsors, merchandising, telephone, music sales, broadcast and advertising sources. Over 30 million viewers saw David Cook win the seventh season of American Idol in May 2008 and when Fuller re-launched the show in 2011 for its 10th season ratings climbed 20% for the finale event. 122.4 million votes were cast, a record for a reality TV show. In 2005 Fuller, along with co-creator Nigel Lythgoe, launched So You Think You Can Dance on the Fox network in the USA. The show grew over four seasons to become a regular summer hit. In 2012 Simon Fuller's XIX Entertainment created a new international format with Jennifer Lopez, Marc Anthony and Jamie King named Q'Viva! The Chosen, and described as a celebration of Latin culture that screened in 21 territories reaching over 30 million Spanish speaking TV viewers.
Simon Fuller has been certified as the most successful British music manager of all time by Billboard magazine, having produced over 500 No.1 hit singles globally and over 240 No.1 albums; his reputation for supporting new music talent is well documented. He has managed the career of Annie Lennox since the release of her multi platinum album Diva in 1991. He has managed hit songwriters and producers, most notably Cathy Dennis, who first met Fuller as the singer of D Mob in the 1980s. Under Fuller's guidance Cathy Dennis has become the UK's No. 1 female songwriter with a string of global hits for artists including Kylie Minogue, Britney Spears, Katy Perry, Pink, Will Young and others. In 2002 Fuller's company discovered 19-year-old Amy Winehouse, produced her first award winning album and signed her to Universal Music.
Fuller managed the Spice Girls through the peak of their success. Under Fuller, the Spice Girls rose to chart topper status and went on to sell over 37.5 million records in less than three years.
In 2012 Simon Fuller announced a partnership with Chris Blackwell, founder of Island Records and owner of Bob Marley catalogue. In 2005, 2006 and 2007 the biggest selling music acts in North America (Kelly Clarkson, Carrie Underwood and Daughtry) were all managed by Simon Fuller.
In 2006, Simon Fuller launched 19RM with acclaimed designer Roland Mouret, the man behind the Galaxy dress made famous by Scarlett Johansson and other Hollywood celebrities. In 2011, Mouret and Fuller opened their first retail venture, a six-floor headquarters in Carlos Place, London comprising retail, design and Atelier in one building and in 2009, Fuller brokered a deal for 19 Entertainment to purchase a majority share in Storm Model Management.
In 2008 Fuller launched the Victoria Beckham dress collection at New York Fashion Week, which has since won plaudits including Brand of The Year at the 2012 and 2014 British Fashion Awards, as well as becoming the best selling high end label of the season. In 2012 Simon Fuller accompanied Victoria Beckham on a trip to Beijing to launch their business in China, and to promote a new venture with British car manufacturer Jaguar Land Rover.
On 1 February 2012, XIX Entertainment launched the David Beckham bodywear range in London with H&M, attended by a global advertising and promotion campaign. In 2014, Fuller and David Beckham announced a new joint venture with Hong Kong-based Global Brands Group Holding Ltd (787) to develop David Beckham and other icon branded consumer products.
Fuller first ventured into sports management in the mid-1990s, when he negotiated the historic first post Bosman transfer of England footballer Steve McManaman to Real Madrid. In 2003 Fuller formed a joint venture partnership with David Beckham, and later masterminded Beckham's $250 million move to LA Galaxy. He remains Beckham's closest advisor.
In 2009, Fuller took on personal representation of tennis player Andy Murray, guiding him to Grand Slam and Wimbledon wins and later helping the player to establish his own business. In March 2011, Simon Fuller was announced as the manager of British F1 driver Lewis Hamilton  and surprised many when he moved Hamilton from McLaren and signed him to a long term contract with the MercedesAMG team. Hamilton won the 2014 F1 World Championship and publicly thanked Fuller, although Hamilton did not renew his deal with Fuller's XIX Entertainment company once it expired at the end of that year. In 2013 it was announced that Fuller was managing 2012 Tour De France winner, Bradley Wiggins.
In 2014, Fuller and Beckham revealed their plan to buy an MLS football team in Miami  and later the same year Fuller was revealed as the mastermind behind Beckham's involvement in a new global whiskey launch with leading British drinks company Diageo.
Fuller is known for his support of good causes, most notably through his TV format Idol Gives Back, which over five years raised over $185 million for charities including Malaria No More, Save The Children and others. In December 2010 Simon Fuller was honoured by United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon: "Simon Fuller is an extraordinary leader" he said. "Idol Gives Back is a tremendous initiative in giving Americans a way to save lives around the world".
In 2008, HRH The Prince of Wales thanked Fuller for his support of the Prince's charity, The Prince's Trust, stating; "He has been one of the most effective and generous ambassadors for my Trust, which I set up 32 years ago to help the most disadvantaged young people in the United Kingdom. There are many young people in the United Kingdom whose lives have been transformed and, in some cases, saved – literally – thanks to the contribution which Simon has made.".
In 2009, Simon Fuller became a Trustee for Malaria No More UK and donated office space, resources and funds to allow the charity operate in London. Fuller remains a passionate ambassador for the cause and has shared his own experience of malaria with the charity.
Fuller was born on 17 May 1960 in Cyprus. Having spent some of his childhood in a British Overseas Territory on the island of Cyprus, where his father, a Royal Air Force pilot, had established a school, the family moved to Accra, Ghana where his father was the headmaster of the British Military School, Burma Camp. The family moved back to Hastings, East Sussex, where Simon's father became headmaster of the school he attended. He has two brothers, Kim and Mark. He married his long-term girlfriend Natalie Swanston in May 2008, and they have three children.
He has a portfolio of real estate including properties in Europe, North America and South America. In 2014, Fuller was awarded an honorary degree by the University of Sussex.
2014 Honorary Degree, University of Brighton
2013 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2012 Anglo-American Cultural Award NYC
2012 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2011 Star on Hollywood Walk of Fame
2011 Humanitarian Honoree, Save the Children Awards LA
2011 Humanitarian Honoree, Malaria No More Awards NYC
2011 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2010 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2009 Top 100 New Establishment, Vanity Fair
2009 Businessman of the Year, Harpers Bazaar UK
2009 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2008 Humanitarian Honoree, Black Ball Keep A Child Alive for HIV / AIDS work NYC
2008 Peter Grant Award, Music Managers Forum
2008 Visionary Award, Producers Guild of America
2008 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2007 Top Trend Setter, Forbes Magazine
2007 Green Award
2007 Emmy: Governor's Award: Idol Gives Back
2007 100 Most Influential People in the World, Time Magazine
2007 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2006 Entrepreneur of the Year, GQ Magazine
2006 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2005 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2004 Emmy: Outstanding Reality/Competition Program – Nominee
2003 Grammy: Album of the Year – Nominee
