Jämtland County (Jämtlands län) is a county or län in the middle of Sweden consisting of the provinces of Jämtland and Härjedalen, along with minor parts of Hälsingland and Ångermanland, plus two small uninhabited strips of Lapland and Dalarna. Jämtland County constitutes 12 percent of Sweden's total area, 49,443 km2 (19,090 sq mi) and is the third largest county in the country. The county capital is Östersund and the county governor, appointed by the Swedish government, is Britt Bohlin Olsson, who leads the administrative board. Jämtland County borders the counties of Dalarna, Gävleborg, Västernorrland, and Västerbotten. It also shares a border with the Norwegian counties of Nord-Trøndelag and Sør-Trøndelag.
The county was established in 1810 and its foundation has both domestic and foreign causes. Upon formation it only consisted of the provinces of Jämtland and Härjedalen, which is why the coat of arms is a shield parted per fess with their provincial arms.
For History, Geography and Culture see: Jämtland and Härjedalen
Jämtland County consists of primarily the provinces of Jämtland and Härjedalen, though minor parts of Hälsingland and Ångermanland are also included, along with small uninhabited areas in Lapland and Dalarna.
The main aim of the County Administrative Board is to fulfil the goals set in national politics by the Riksdag and the Government, to coordinate the interests and promote the development of the county, to establish regional goals and safeguard the due process of law in the handling of each case. The County Administrative Board is a Government Agency headed by a Governor. See List of Jämtland Governors.
Jämtland County is sparsely populated and more than one third of the population live on the countryside, making Jämtland County the second largest rural region in Sweden, after Gotland County, though a majority of the population live in the rather densely populated region surrounding lake Storsjön, commonly called Storsjöbygden, "the Storsjö district/countryside".
The county is dominated by the Swedish Social Democratic Party and the Swedish Rural Centre Party, which is unique in Sweden, but corresponds to the situation in the bordering Norwegian county of Nord-Trøndelag. The county is rather contrastive in the political field. While the municipality association and a majority of the municipalities are governed by liberal-conservative (Swedish: borgerlig, lit. "bourgeois") majorities or by coalitions overstepping the bloc border, the county council is red-green and the Social Democrats receive three out of five mandates to the Riksdag.
After the Swedish general election in 2014, the Jämtland County council are represented by the following political parties:
The County Council of Jämtland or Jämtlands Läns Landsting.
Berg
Bräcke
Härjedalen
Krokom
Ragunda
Strömsund
Åre
Östersund
The arms for the County of Jämtland is a combination of the arms of Jämtland, and Härjedalen. When it is shown with a royal crown it represents the County Administrative Board. Blazon: "Parted per fess, the arms of Jämtland and the arms of Härjedalen."
Duke of Jämtland, a title for members of the royal family (see Duchies in Sweden), born solely by Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden before his accession to the throne.
Jamtlandic
