Tic Tac (officially styled as "tic tac") is a brand of small, hard mints, manufactured by the Italian confectioner Ferrero, and available in a variety of flavors in over 100 countries.
Tic Tacs were first produced in 1969. They are usually sold in small transparent plastic boxes with a flip-action living hinge lid. Originally, Tic Tacs were dyed specific colors for different flavors. In many countries, the transparent plastic boxes are colored but the actual Tic Tac pieces are white.
Tic Tacs were first introduced by Ferrero in 1969, under the name "Refreshing Mints". In 1970, the name was changed to Tic Tacs, after the distinctive sound of the mints rattling in their container. Besides the original "Orange" and Fresh Mint flavors, several new varieties were added, including aniseed, cinnamon (or "Winter Warmer"), an orange and grape mix (in 1976), spearmint, peppermint, Powermint, sour apple, mandarin, tangarine, berry, fresh orange, strawberry, wintergreen, pink grapefruit, orange and lime together (in 1978), cherry, passion fruit (in 2007), pomegranate (in 2010), mango, and lime. The grape flavor was eliminated in 1976 because of health concerns about the red dye amaranth (FD&C Red #2), a suspected carcinogen. Orange Tic Tacs were sold without the Grape.
Other innovations have included holiday gift packs for Christmas, Easter, St Patricks Day, and Valentine's Day.
Since 1980, the Tic Tac slogan has been "The 1½ Calorie Breath Mint".
During the 1990s, "double packs" were introduced, featuring a regular Tic Tac container with two flavors inside. Available combinations included Tangerine and Lime, Orange and Grape, and Berry and Cherry.
In the UK, France, Ireland, Italy and Australia Tic Tacs are noted as being less than two calories with the slogan "Two hours of Tic Tac freshness in less than two calories". In Canada, New Zealand and Australia, and used once in the United States, the Tic Tac slogan is "it's not just a mint, it's a tic tac". In India, the Tic Tac slogan is "Refreshment to be shared".
In 2006, Tic Tac introduced a "Bold" edition with more intense flavors of Mint and Fruit.
Orange Tic Tacs featured prominently in the 2007 film Juno, in an orange box with white color candies as are sold in Canada and Brazil. Film promoters distributed boxes of the candies prior to the film's release.
In 2008, Tic Tac introduced Tic Tac Chill, which are slightly larger than ordinary Tic Tacs and come in a dual-opening packaging, using the traditional living hinge or a sliding opening on the front of the case. These come in three flavors: Exotic Cherry, Berry Blast, and Paradise Mint. Tic Tac Chill mints are also sugar free, the Exotic Cherry ones instead being sweetened with xylitol.
Orange, Mint, Spearmint, Mintensity, Peach and Passion, Strawberry Mix, Cherry, Elaichi (cardamom) and Banana are available in India.
Tic Tac sometimes provides limited editions to promote movies. In 2015, a special Minions movie edition was produced containing banana or passion fruit flavoured Tic Tacs. There were three different covers with pictures of either Stuart, Kevin or Bob.
45% of the world's Tic Tacs are manufactured in the Ferrero factory in Cork, Ireland.
For Fresh mint (Europe/US); Peppermint (Australia)
Per 100 g – Energy 1663 kJ (391 kcal), Protein 0.1 g, Carbohydrate 97.5 g, Fat 0.4 g.
Per Tic Tac – Energy 8 kJ (2 kcal), Protein 0 g, Carbohydrate 0.5 g, Fat 0 g.
Sugar, maltodextrin, tartaric acid, natural and artificial flavors, rice starch, gum arabic, filling agent (magnesium stearate), artificial colors, glazing agent (carnauba wax).
Each pack weighs 15–18 g and contains about 36 Tic Tacs. New packs in Australia and Canada weigh 24 g and contain 50 Tic Tacs, and the Tic Tac "Big Box" weighs 49 g and contains 100 Tic Tacs. The "Big Pack" weighs 29 grams (1 ounce) and contains 60 pieces. The "Jumbo Pack" weighs 98 grams (3.4 ounce) and contains 200 pieces.
Each Tic Tac weighs just under 0.5 g. Since US federal regulations state that if a single serving contains less than 0.5 g of sugars it is allowable to express the amount of sugar in a serving as zero, and since a single serving of Tic Tacs is a single Tic Tac, Tic Tacs are labeled in the US as containing zero sugar.
Altoids
Ipso (candy)
Mentos
Certs
Life Savers and Breath Savers
Hajmola Candy
