Google Keep is a note taking application developed by Google. Announced on March 20, 2013, Google Keep is available as a mobile app for the Android and iOS mobile operating systems and as a web application. As of September 2015, it has been downloaded over 50 million times on Google Play.
Google Keep has several features including color coding notes, inserting images, creating lists, geo-fencing, shareable notes, and search by color. Users can set time or location-based reminders for notes. Reminders set through Keep are also accessible by other Google applications such as Google Now. Text from images can be extracted using Optical Character Recognition technology. This, however, works only with the English language. Voice recordings created through Keep are automatically transcribed. Google Keep allows users to convert text notes into checklists.
Google Keep allows users to categorize notes using labels, and notes are searchable based on their color, whether they have a reminder, audio, images, or are a list. On the Android app, swiping a note to the left or right in the notes list archives the note. Archived notes appear in the Archive section. Keep also allows users to create a copy (duplicate) of a note. Users can also choose between the List View or Grid View modes on the web. On Android, users can choose between the single-column view and the multi-column view.
The Google Keep mobile app can be installed on devices that have been approved by Google with Android version 4.0.3 (Ice Cream Sandwich) or higher. Notes can be created through the mobile app or through the Keep website and are synchronized across both platforms via the user's Google Account. This allows users to access saved notes anywhere with internet as well as update notes offline. Google Keep is compatible with Android Wear. Once an Android wearable is paired with another Android device, the top 10 items in Keep show up automatically. Users can create new notes using voice input, add and tick off items on lists, view reminders and snooze notifications.
Time listed Google Keep among its 50 Best Android Applications for 2013.
Google released an iOS version of Google Keep on 24 September 2015. It is available for both iPhone and iPad running iOS 8.0 or later. Notes are synced between devices using a user's Google account very similar to the Android version. The app also features the same photo syncing, voice recording and reminder options that the Android version uses; reminders are delivered across all signed-in devices, including via iOS push notifications.
Google Keep app for Chrome browser and Chrome OS are one of the early packaged apps provided by Google. The app works offline for creating, editing and deleting notes as well as for extra features such as adding images. The Google Keep Chrome app also works on Linux operating systems as well as Windows and Mac, despite Linux not having a native Google Drive app available.
Comparison of notetaking software
Google Notebook
