lighttpd (pronounced "lighty") is an open-source web server optimized for speed-critical environments while remaining standards-compliant, secure and flexible. It was originally written by Jan Kneschke as a proof-of-concept of the c10k problem – how to handle 10,000 connections in parallel on one server, but has gained worldwide popularity.
The low memory footprint (compared to other web servers), small CPU load and speed optimizations make lighttpd suitable for servers that are suffering load problems, or for serving static media separately from dynamic content. lighttpd is free software/open source, and is distributed under the BSD license. It runs natively on Unix-like operating systems as well as Microsoft Windows.
lighttpd supports the FastCGI, SCGI and CGI interfaces to external programs, allowing web applications written in any programming language to be used with the server. As a particularly popular language, PHP performance has received special attention. Lighttpd's FastCGI can be configured to support PHP with opcode caches (like APC) properly and efficiently. Additionally, it has received attention from its popularity within the Python, Perl, Ruby and Lua communities. Lighttpd also supports WebDNA, the resilient in-memory database system designed to build database-driven websites. It is a popular web server for the Catalyst and Ruby on Rails web frameworks. Lighttpd does not support ISAPI.
Load balancing FastCGI, SCGI and HTTP proxy support
chroot support
web server event mechanism performance – select(), poll(), and epoll() 
Support for more efficient event notification schemes like kqueue and epoll
Conditional URL rewriting (mod_rewrite)
TLS/SSL with SNI support, via OpenSSL.
Authentication against an LDAP server
RRDtool statistics
Rule-based downloading with possibility of a script handling only authentication
Server Side Includes support (but not server-side CGI)
Flexible virtual hosting
Modules support
Cache Meta Language (currently being replaced by mod_magnet) using the Lua programming language
Minimal WebDAV support
Servlet (AJP) support (in versions 1.5.x and up)
HTTP compression using mod_compress and the newer mod_deflate (1.5.x)
Light-weight (less than 1 MB)
Single-process design with only several threads. No processes or threads started per connection.
Lighttpd (< 1.4.40) officially does not support sending large files from CGI, FastCGI, or proxies  unless X-Sendfile is used. This limitation has been removed in lighttpd 1.4.40.
Lighttpd is used by a number of high-traffic websites, among them are Bloglines and Xkcd. It was used in the past by Meebo and YouTube. Wikimedia also runs Lighttpd servers.
Comparison of web server software
Internet Cache Protocol
Proxy server which discusses client-side proxies
Reverse proxy which discusses origin-side proxies
Traffic Server
Web accelerator which discusses host-based HTTP acceleration
