Nimbuzz is a proprietary cross-platform instant messaging aggregator for smartphones, tablets and personal computers developed by Nimbuzz B.V. Nimbuzz has 150 million users in 200 countries.
Under Vikas Saxena's leadership, Nimbuzz application enables users to enjoy free calls, instant messaging, social games, file sharing, and social networking on their mobile device. In addition; Nimbuzz offers discounted calling rates to most countries in the world. Nimbuzz garners more than 210,000 new registrations per day.
Originally based in the Netherlands, Nimbuzz was founded in 2006 by Evert Jaap Lugt. In the first round of funding the company received US$10 million on 19 May 2007, from various investors. In a second round of funding Nimbuzz received an additional US$15 million.
Nimbuzz entered the VoIP market in January 2007. In May 2008, the company launched its combined Voice-over-Internet Protocol (VoIP) and instant messaging client. In January 2009, the company was selected as one of 100 winners of the industry award "Red Herring Global 100" for 2008.
In 2012 Nimbuzz moved its headquarters from Rotterdam to New Delhi, India to be closer to the expected mobile Internet boom happening there in the next five years. Nimbuzz appointed Vikas Saxena as the new CEO as part of the move. A fifth of Nimbuzz's users reside in India. Additional offices are located in San Francisco, California; Sao Paulo, Brazil; Córdoba, Argentina where a software development team is located; and Rotterdam, the Netherlands. Revenue for the company comes from NimbuzzOut, sales on N-World, and from advertising inside the application. The company also partners directly with some telecom operators.
Nimbuzz is available for Android, iOS, BlackBerry OS, Symbian, Windows Phone and Java ME mobile operating systems. It is one of the few IM apps available for Java-based phones, and they account for 25% of Nimbuzz users. For non-natively supported devices, a WAP interface is available. For desktop computers, clients are available for both Windows and Mac OS X. It is available in Spanish, French, German, Italian, Dutch, Portuguese, Russian, Hindi and Arabic.
Nimbuzz users can send XMPP based instant messages, images, and share their location. Group chat is supported. Voice-over-Internet Protocol calls between most Nimbuzz clients is supported, and there is a VoIP-to-PSTN (landline/cellular) service branded as "NimbuzzOut". Nimbuzz can be set up with any valid SIP (VoIP) account.
Nimbuzz supports interaction with popular messaging services such as Twitter, Facebook Chat and Google Talk. In February 2012, Nimbuzz announced the discontinuation of support for ICQ, AIM, Myspace and Hyves because the general lack of usage of these chat services.
Nimbuzz has an in-app portal called N-World, with applications, gifts, games, avatars and other virtual goods for sale. N-World has its own currency called Nimbuckz
