ANSYS, Inc. is an American Computer-aided engineering software developer headquartered south of Pittsburgh in Cecil Township, Pennsylvania, United States. Ansys publishes engineering analysis software across a range of disciplines including finite element analysis, structural analysis, computational fluid dynamics, explicit and implicit methods, and heat transfer.
ANSYS Autodyn is computer simulation tool for simulating the response of materials to short duration severe loadings from impact, high pressure or explosions.
ANSYS Mechanical is a finite element analysis tool for structural analysis, including linear, nonlinear and dynamic studies. This computer simulation product provides finite elements to model behavior, and supports material models and equation solvers for a wide range of mechanical design problems. ANSYS Mechanical also includes thermal analysis and coupled-physics capabilities involving acoustics, piezoelectric, thermal–structural and thermo-electric analysis.
ANSYS Fluent, CFD, CFX, and related software are Computational Fluid Dynamics software tools used by engineers for design and analysis. These tools can simulate fluid flows in a virtual environment — for example, the fluid dynamics of ship hulls; gas turbine engines (including the compressors, combustion chamber, turbines and afterburners); aircraft aerodynamics; pumps, fans, HVAC systems, mixing vessels, hydrocyclones, vacuum cleaners, etc.
ANSYS HFSS is a Finite Element Analysis tool for simulating full-wave electromagnetic fields. HFSS incorporates finite element, integral equation, and hybrid methods to solve a wide range of microwave, RF and high-speed digital applications.
ANSYS Maxwell is a Finite Element Analysis tool for electromagnetic field simulation, primarily for engineers tasked with designing and analyzing electromagnetic and electromechanical devices, including motors, actuators, transformers, sensors and coils. ANSYS Maxwell incorporates finite element method solvers to solve static, frequency-domain, and time-varying electromagnetic and electric fields.
ANSYS SIwave is a specialized design platform for power integrity, signal integrity and Electromagnetic interference (EMI) analysis of electronic packages and PCBs.
ANSYS Multiphysics and ANSYS Workbench provide multiple ANSYS tools in a single package.
A free student version is available for download, and supports up to 32,000 nodes/elements.
The company was founded in 1970. by John A. Swanson as Swanson Analysis Systems, Inc (SASI). Its primary purpose was to develop and market finite element analysis software for structural physics that could simulate static (stationary), dynamic (moving) and thermal (heat transfer) problems. SASI developed its business in parallel with the growth in computer technology and engineering needs. The company grew by 10 percent to 20 percent each year, and in 1994 it was sold to TA Associates. The new owners took SASI’s leading software, called ANSYS, as their flagship product and designated ANSYS, Inc. as the new company name.
Ansys has acquired a number of companies since 2000, including ICEM CFD Engineering, Space-claim, CADOE S.A., of Lyon, France, a company specializing in parametric analysis, and with numerous French clients, including Michelin, Renault and Airbus, and CFX (2003); Century Dynamics, Harvard Thermal, and Fluent Inc. (2006); Ansoft Corporation (2008); Apache Design Solutions (2011); Esterel Technologies (2012); EVEN and Reaction Design (2013); and Spaceclaim Corporation (2014).
Ansys was listed on the NASDAQ stock exchange in 1996. In 2011, Investor's Business Daily gave the firm a top score on its SmartSelect composite ratings. The organization claims to reinvest 15 percent of its revenues each year into research to continually refine the software.
