A lightweight Linux distribution is a Linux distribution that uses relatively few resources, which may result in performance improvements especially on old computers with slower CPUs and less RAM.
One big factor that determines the resource usage and speed of a desktop distribution is the window manager it uses. For example, version 10.10 of Lubuntu uses the LXDE window manager and requires a minimum of 128 MB of RAM and a Pentium II processor; it is a lightweight variant of Ubuntu that, in comparison, uses Unity as a window manager and requires a 1 GHz processor and 1 GB of RAM. The window manager can be changed in most Linux distributions, and the same Linux distribution may also have various versions with different window managers; examples are Porteus, which comes in LXDE, Xfce and Mate versions, and Zenwalk, which comes in Xfce and Openbox versions.
Alpine Linux – a security-oriented, lightweight Linux distribution (307 MB) based on musl and BusyBox. Mini download is 66 MB; base system (excluding kernel) is under 5 MB. Media download is 308 MB for version 3.1.3.
Absolute Linux – a lightweight desktop-oriented distribution based on Slackware
antiX – lightweight version (690 MB) of its parent distribution MEPIS Linux, based on Debian testing. Core install: 128 MB, Base approx. 300 MB. Package manager: Synaptic
ArchBang – inspired by CrunchBang Linux but based on the Arch Linux distribution instead of Debian. It uses the lightweight Openbox Window Manager to achieve the same look and feel.
BasicLinux – a very lightweight distribution (2.8 MB apparently) capable of running on an Intel 386 and 3 MB of RAM
Bodhi Linux – a lightweight and minimalistic distribution
CoreOS – a lightweight system (2×1 GB) than runs containers and provides cluster management capabilities
Chrome OS
CrunchBang Linux – No longer in development; succeeded by BunsenLabs. A relatively large (771 MB) Debian based distribution designed primarily for speed and ease of use.
Damn Small Linux – download: 50 MB. Additional software available as "DSL Extensions" and using the Debian APT tool, which has to be installed. "Light enough to power a 486DX with 16 MB of RAM"
Elive – a lightweight and complete distribution that can run in 64 MB of RAM and 100 MHz of CPU, based on Debian and using a customized Enlightenment as only Desktop environment
Feather Linux – a lightweight Linux distribution (under 128 MB) derived from Knoppix. Now dormant.
LinuxBBQ – a very lightweight (291.5 MB) and resource-friendly distribution based on Debian Sid with TUI productivity applications.
Lightweight Portable Security – a lightweight live desktop-oriented distribution based on Arch Linux
Linux Lite – A lightweight distribution designed with new Linux users in mind
Lubuntu – lightweight (705 MB) in comparison to Ubuntu, it uses the LXDE desktop.
LXLE – a full featured OS (apps preinstalled) for older hardware, using minimal resources, respun from Lubuntu. Media download, approx 1.3G.
Nanolinux – a 14 MB distribution based on Tiny Core Linux.
Peppermint Linux OS – download: 587 MB, based on Lubuntu
Porteus – it weighs in at under 300 MB, making it a lightweight contender Comes with the LXDE and KDE desktops
Puppy Linux – lightweight relative to most other Linux distributions Download: 133−162 MB. Package Manager: Puppy Package Manager (PPM)
SliTaz – 35−42 MB distribution; Package Manager is Tazpkg with its repository of packages
Tiny Core Linux – (9, 15 or 72 MB) distribution; Software repository: TCZ packages
Trisquel Mini – lightweight version (603 MB) of Trisquel with LXDE
TurnKey Linux Virtual Appliance Library - lightweight headless server software appliance library. Based on a minified Debian base. v14.1 Core ISO is 212MB and uses ~173MB RAM (idle in Live mode).
Xubuntu – lightweight (980 MB) in comparison to Ubuntu. It uses the XFCE desktop.
Zenwalk – a lightweight linux distribution (845 MB) based on Slackware
Comparison of Linux distributions
Comparison of lightweight web browsers
List of Linux distributions that run from RAM
List of live CDs
Open-source computer hardware
