Wrike, Inc. is a privately held project management application service provider based in Mountain View, California. Wrike's primary product (also called Wrike) is an online tool for project management and work collaboration. It enables its users to manage and track projects, deadlines, schedules, and other workflow processes. It also allows users to collaborate with one another. The application is available in English, French, Spanish, German, Portuguese, Italian, Japanese and Russian. The primary goal of the software is to help streamline workflow and allow companies to focus on core tasks.
Wrike was founded in 2006 by Andrew Filev. Filev initially self-funded the company before obtaining investor funding later on. Wrike released the beta version of the Wrike product in December 2006. The product was initially integrated with email, enabling users to keep track of schedules, deadlines, and tasks via email messages. In June 2007, the company released a full, professional version of the application. The app provided two-way email integration, offered 9 predefined workflow groups (e.g. Customers, By Project, Personal, etc.), and accommodated between 5 and 50 users at any given time. In August 2008, Wrike released an "Enterprise" version of the software that included the ability to create task dependencies based on Gantt charts.
In 2009, Wrike synchronized tasks with Google's Android devices and Windows Mobile devices. In 2010, Wrike integrated its services with Google Docs. Later that year, the application also added an activity stream that offered real-time updates of information and chat functions. In October 2010, Wrike released a brand new version of the software with an integrated social function. The new version kept the activity stream and added other social features like a "Dashboard" and a "Follow" feature. In December 2010, Wrike released an API, allowing third-party developers to create their own apps to synchronize with the Wrike framework.
In 2011, Wrike released mobile apps for the iPhone, iPad, and BlackBerry devices. The app was free for Wrike users. They also integrated the software with the Google Apps Marketplace and Jive in 2011. In May 2012, the company released a free version of the browser app. The free version of the software allowed users to create and assign tasks, mark tasks "complete," and attach files (among other features). Wrike raised $1 million in funding from England-based TMT Investments in June 2012. At that time, Wrike counted Capgemini, Kraft Foods, Salesforce.com, and Holiday Inn among its clients.
In September 2012, Wrike integrated a collaborative real-time text editor into its software. The following month, they released a plugin for Apple Mail, their first native product for the Mac OS. In November of that year, Wrike released updated versions of its Android, iOS, and browser apps. The Wrike Android and iOS apps were equipped with the interactive timeline (in the form of Gantt charts) that was common on the browser app in March 2013. In October 2013, Wrike secured $10 million in investment funding from Bain Capital. They then launched a new "Enterprise" platform aimed at larger businesses in December 2013. In 2014, Wrike added new workflow tools and customization options to its platform. In May 2015, the company secured $15 million in a new round of funding. Investors included Scale Venture Partners, DCM Ventures, and Bain Capital. At that time, Wrike had 8,000 customers, 200 employees, and 30,000 new users each month.
Wrike is a collaborative project management software designed to manage workflow for companies and organizations of varying sizes. The software is offered in three different tiers: Free, Professional, and Enterprise. The Free version is the least expansive, offering the ability to create tasks, assign tasks, mark tasks complete, and attach files. The Free version allows an unlimited number of collaborators to use the service, while 5 "power users" can create, assign, and access tasks. The Professional version offers access to Gantt charts, time-tracking, a drag-and-drop interface, API compatibility, and more. The Enterprise version offers real-time data and analysis and the ability to assign users into multiple specified work groups (among many other features). Wrike can also be found on iOS and Android devices.
Virtually all versions of the software feature an activity stream that updates users on any activity performed by other users in specified work groups. Social features are also embedded into Wrike's software. Wrike is also integrated with a number of other software products including Google Apps, Microsoft Outlook, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Project, Google Drive, Dropbox, Apple Mail, Box, IBM Connections, and others.
2006 - Le Web 3 Prize in B2B category
2008 - eWeek Excellence Award in Productivity Applications category
2009 - Red Herring's Top 100 Global Company Award
2011 - SenchaCon Contest (Third Place)
2011 - Finalist in the American Business Awards in the category “Computer Software – New Version.”
2014 - Named "Cool Vendor" by Gartner
2015 - Named one of the "Best Places to Work" by San Francisco Business Times/Silicon Valley Business Journal
List of collaborative software
List of project management software
List of applications with iCalendar support
