Stanislav "Stan" Grof (born July 1, 1931) is a psychiatrist, one of the founders of the field of transpersonal psychology and a researcher into the use of non-ordinary states of consciousness for purposes of exploring, healing, and obtaining growth and insights into the human psyche. Grof received the VISION 97 award granted by the Foundation of Dagmar and Václav Havel in Prague on October 5, 2007.
Grof is known, in scientific circles, for his early studies of LSD and its effects on the psyche—the field of psychedelic therapy. Building on his observations while conducting LSD research and on Otto Rank's theory of birth trauma, Grof constructed a theoretical framework for prenatal and perinatal psychology and transpersonal psychology in which LSD trips and other powerfully emotional experiences were mapped onto a person's early fetal and neonatal experiences. Over time, this theory developed into what Grof called a "cartography" of the deep human psyche. Following the suppression of legal LSD use in the late 1960s, Grof went on to develop a theory that many states of mind could be explored without drugs by using certain breathing techniques. He continues this work as of 2015 under the trademark "Holotropic Breathwork".
Grof received his M.D. from Charles University in Prague in 1957 and then completed his Ph.D. in medicine at the Czechoslovakian Academy of Sciences in 1965, training as a Freudian psychoanalyst at this time. In 1967 he was invited as an Assistant Professor of Psychiatry at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine in Baltimore, United States, and went on to become Chief of Psychiatric Research at the Maryland Psychiatric Research Center where he worked with Walter Pahnke and Bill Richards among others. In 1973 he was invited to the Esalen Institute in Big Sur, California, and lived there until 1987 as a scholar-in-residence, developing his ideas.
As founding president of the International Transpersonal Association (founded in 1977), he went on to become distinguished adjunct faculty member of the Department of Philosophy, Cosmology, and Consciousness at the California Institute of Integral Studies, a position he remains in as of 2015.
Grof featured in the film Entheogen: Awakening the Divine Within, a 2006 documentary about rediscovering an enchanted cosmos in the modern world. He has also been featured in five other documentaries.
Grof distinguishes between two modes of consciousness: the hylotropic and the holotropic. The hylotropic mode relates to "the normal, everyday experience of consensus reality". The holotropic has to do with states which aim towards wholeness and the totality of existence. The holotropic is characteristic of non-ordinary states of consciousness such as meditative, mystical, or psychedelic experiences. According to Grof, contemporary psychiatry often categorizes these non-ordinary states as psychotic. Grof connects the hylotropic to the Hindu conception of namarupa ("name and form"), the separate, individual, illusory self. He connects the holotropic to the Hindu conception of Atman-Brahman, the divine, true nature of the self.
In the late 1970s Grof proposed a psychological hypothesis to explain the near-death experience. According to Grof the NDE reflects memories of the birth process with the tunnel representing the birth canal. Susan Blackmore claimed the hypothesis is "pitifully inadequate to explain the NDE. For a start the newborn infant would not see anything like a tunnel as it was being born." The psychologist Chris French has written "the experience of being born is only very superficially similar to the NDE" and the hypothesis has been refuted as it is common for those born by caesarean section to experience a tunnel during the NDE. Michael Shermer also criticized the hypothesis "there is no evidence for infantile memories of any kind. Furthermore, the birth canal does not look like a tunnel and besides the infant's head is normally down and its eyes are closed." An article in the peer-reviewed APA journal Psychology of Consciousness suggested that Grof's patients may have experienced false memories of birth and before birth.
Stanislav Grof has researched the effects of psychedelic substances, which can also be induced by non-pharmacological means. Grof has developed a "cartography of the psyche" based on his clinical work with psychedelics, which describe the "basic types of experience that become available to an average person" when using psychedelics or "various powerful non-pharmacological experiential techniques".
According to Grof, traditional psychiatry, psychology and psychotherapy use a model of the human psyche that is limited to postnatal biography and the Freudian individual unconscious. This model does not account for the experiences and observations from holotropic states of consciousness, which activate "deep unconscious and superconscious levels of the human psyche". These levels include:
The Sensory Barrier and the Recollective-Biographical Barrier
The Perinatal Matrices
The Transpersonal Dimensions of the Psyche
Ego death appears in the fourth Perinatal Matrix.
"Deep self-exploration" starts for many people with unspecific sensory experiences. They are a sensory barrier that one has to pass through.
The next level is the recollective-biographical level and the individual unconsciousness. These involve the personal biography, and unresolved emotional issues. In "experiential work" this autobiographical material is fully relived. Relevant memories and associated fantasy material may emerge as a single or condensed experience, which Grof calls COEX. According to Grof, most of these COEXs are connected with specific aspects of the birth process. Memories of physical traumas form an integral part of this level of the psyche.
According to Grof, the reliving of emotional and physical pain can become so intense that an identification with "the pain of entire groups of unfortunate people, all of humanity, or even all of life", can manifest. This is accompanied with "dramatic physiological manifestations".
At this level, death may be encountered and birth relived. According to Grof, there are four "hypothetical dynamic matrices governing the processes related to the perinatal level of the unconsciousness", called "basic perinatal matrices" (BPM). These BPM's correspond to the stages of birth during the process of childbirth.
This is the original symbiotic unity of the fetus with the maternal organism. Elements of this state can be accompanied with, or alternate with, experiences of a lack of boundaries and obstructions, such as the ocean and the cosmos. The extreme expression of the sacred and spiritual quality of BPM I is the experience of cosmic unity and the unio mystica.
This matrix starts with the onset of labor. The intrusion of chemicals and the pressures of labor change the situation in the womb, and "interrupt the fetus’ blissful connection with the mother and alter its pristine universe." Accessing this layer gives rise to strong feeling of "no escape". When experiencing this level, the sense of loneliness and helplessness is overwhelming.
This matrix is connected with the move of the fetus through the birth channel. It involves a struggle for survival. When experiencing this layer, strong aggression and demonic forces are encountered. Biographical memories associated with this matrix include struggles, fights, and adventurous activities.
This matrix is related to the stage of delivery, the actual birth of the child. The build up of tension, pain and anxiety is suddenly released. The symbolic counterpart is the Death-Rebirth Experience, in which the individual may have a strong feeling of impending catastrophe, and may be desperately struggling to stop this process. The transition from BPM III to BPM IV may involve a sense of total annihilation:
This experience of ego death seems to entail an instant merciless destruction of all previous reference points in the life of the individual.
According to Grof what dies in this process is "a basically paranoid attitude toward the world which reflects the negative experience of the subject during childbirth and later." When experienced in its final and most complete form,
...ego death means an irreversible end to one's philosophical identification with what Alan Watts called skin-encapsulated ego."
This dimension includes a wide range of phenomena: Experiential Extensions within Consensus Reality and Space-Time
1. Transcendence of Spatial Boundaries
a. Experience of Dual Unity
b. Identification with Other Persons
c. Group Identification and Group Consciousness
d. Identification with Animals
e. Identification with Plants and Botanical Processes
f. Oneness with Life and All Creation
g. Experience of Inanimate Matter and Inorganic Processes
h. Primary Consciousness
i. Extraterrestrial Experiences
j. Identification with the Entire Physical Universe
k. Psychic Phenomena Involving Transcendence of Space
2. Transcendence of the Boundaries of Linear Time
a. Embryonal and Fetal Experiences
b. Ancestral Experiences
c. Racial and Collective Experiences
d. Past Incarnation Experiences
e. Phylogenetic Experiences
f. Experiences of Planetary Evolution
g. Cosmogenetic Experiences
h. Psychic Phenomena Involving Transcendence of Time
3. Physical Introversion and Narrowing of Consciousness Experiential Extension Beyond Consensus Reality and Space-Time
a. Spiritistic and Mediumistic Experiences
b. Energetic Phenomena of the Subtle Body
c. Experiences of Animal Spirits
d. Encounters with Spirit Guides and Suprahuman Beings
e. Visits to Other Universes and Meetings with Their Inhabitants
f. Experiences of Mythological and Fairy-Tale Sequences
g. Experiences of Specific Blissful and Wrathful Deities
h. Experiences of Universal Archetypes
i. Intuitive Understanding of Universal Symbols
j. Creative Inspiration and the Promethean Impulse
k. Experience of the Demiurg and Insights into Cosmic Creation
l. Experience of Cosmic Consciousness
m. The Supracosmic and Metacosmic Void
Transpersonal Experiences of Psychoid Nature
1. Synchronistic Links between Consciousness and Matter
2. Spontaneous Psychoid Events
a. Supernormal Physical Feats
b. Spiritistic Phenomena and Physical Mediumship
c. Recurrent Spontaneous Psychokinesis
d. Unidentified Flying Objects
3. Intentional Psychokinesis
a. Ceremonial Magic
b. Healing and Hexing
c. Siddhis
d. Laboratory Psychokinesis Philosophical Challenges from Transpersonal Experiences
Realms Of The Human Unconscious: Observations From LSD Research (1975), republished by Souvenir Press in 2010
The Human Encounter With Death (1977) with Joan Halifax
LSD Psychotherapy (1980)
Beyond Death: The Gates Of Consciousness (1981) with Christina Grof
Ancient Wisdom And Modern Science (1984) Edited by Stanislav Grof
Beyond the Brain: Birth, Death And Transcendence In Psychotherapy (1985)
Human Survival And Consciousness Evolution (1988) Edited with Marjorie L. Valier
The Adventure Of Self-Discovery: Dimensions of Consciousness And New Perspectives In Psychotherapy (1988)
Spiritual Emergency: When Personal Transformation Becomes A Crisis (1989) Edited with Christina Grof
The Stormy Search For The Self: A Guide To Personal Growth Through Transformative Crisis (1990) with Christina Grof
The Holotropic Mind: The Three levels Of Human Consciousness And How They Shape Our Lives (1992) with Hal Zina Bennet
Books Of The Dead: Manuals For Living And Dying (1993)
The Thirst For Wholeness: Attachment, Addiction And The Spiritual Path (1994) by Christina Grof
The Transpersonal Vision (1998) book and audio
The Cosmic Game: Explorations Of The Frontiers Of Human Consciousness (1998)
The Consciousness Revolution: A Transatlantic Dialogue (1999) with Peter Russell and Ervin Laszlo. Foreword by Ken Wilber
Psychology Of The Future: Lessons From Modern Consciousness Research (2000)
Caterpillar Dreams (2004) with Melody Sullivan
When The Impossible Happens: Adventures In Non-Ordinary Reality (2006)
The Ultimate Journey: Consciousness And The Mystery Of Death (2006)
"New Perspectives in Understanding and Treatment of Emotional Disorders," Chapter 13 in Psychedelic Medicine: New Evidence for Hallucinogens as Treatments, Michael J. Winkelman and Thomas B. Roberts (editors) (2007). Westport, CT: Praeger/Greenwood.
LSD: Doorway to the Numinous: The Groundbreaking Psychedelic Research into Realms of the Human Unconscious (2009)
Holotropic Breathwork: A New Approach to Self-Exploration and Therapy (2010)
Healing Our Deepest Wounds: The Holotropic Paradigm Shift (2012)
Perinatal matrices
