Potassium iodate (KIO3) is a chemical compound. It is ionic, made up of K+ ions and IO3− ions in a 1:1 ratio.
Potassium iodate is an oxidizing agent and as such it can cause fires if in contact with combustible materials or reducing agents. It can be prepared by reacting a potassium-containing base such as potassium hydroxide with iodic acid, for example:
HIO3 + KOH → KIO3 + H2O
It can also be prepared by adding iodine to a hot, concentrated solution of potassium hydroxide.
3 I2 + 6 KOH → KIO3 + 5 KI + 3 H2O
Or by fusing potassium iodide with potassium chlorate, bromate or perchlorate, the melt is extracted with water and potassium iodate is isolated from the solution by crystallization:
KI + KClO3 → KIO3 + KCl
Conditions/substances to avoid include: heat, shock, friction, combustible materials, reducing materials, aluminium, organic compounds, carbon, hydrogen peroxide and sulfides.
Potassium iodate is sometimes used for iodination of table salt to prevent iodine deficiency. Because iodide can be oxidized to iodine by molecular oxygen under wet conditions, US companies add thiosulfates or other antioxidants to the potassium iodide. In other countries, potassium iodate is used as a source for dietary iodine. It is also an ingredient in some baby formula milk.
Like potassium bromate, potassium iodate is occasionally used as a maturing agent in baking.
Potassium iodate may be used to protect against accumulation of radioactive iodine in the thyroid by saturating the body with a stable source of iodine prior to exposure. Approved by the World Health Organization for radiation protection, potassium iodate (KIO3) is an alternative to potassium iodide (KI), which has poor shelf life in hot and humid climates. The UK, Singapore, United Arab Emirates, and the U.S. states Idaho and Utah are known to stock potassium iodate in tablet form. The government of Ireland also, following the September 11 attacks, issued potassium iodate tablets to all households. It is not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use as a thyroid blocker, and the FDA has taken action against US websites that promote this use.
