A natural arch, natural bridge or, less commonly, a rock arch is a natural rock formation where a rock arch forms, with an opening underneath. Most natural arches form as a narrow bridge, walled by cliffs, become narrower from erosion, with a softer rock stratum under the cliff-forming stratum gradually eroding out until the rock shelters thus formed meet underneath the ridge, thus forming the arch. Natural arches commonly form where cliffs are subject to erosion from the sea, rivers or weathering (subaerial processes); the processes "find" weaknesses in rocks and work on them, making them larger until they break through.
The choice between bridge and arch is somewhat arbitrary. The Natural Arch and Bridge Society identifies a bridge as a subtype of arch that is primarily water-formed. By contrast, the Dictionary of Geological Terms defines a natural bridge as a "natural arch that spans a valley of erosion."
The largest natural arch, by a significant margin, is the Xianren Bridge in China, with a span of 122 ± 5 meters (400 ± 15 ft).
On coasts two different types of arches can form depending on the geology. On discordant coastlines rock types run at 90° to the coast. Wave refraction concentrates the wave energy on the headland, and an arch forms when caves break through the headland, e.g., London Bridge in (Victoria, Australia), Neil Island in (Andaman, India). When these eventually collapse, they form stacks and stumps. On concordant coastlines rock types run parallel to the coastline, with weak rock (such as shale) protected by stronger rock (such as limestone) the wave action breaks through the strong rock and then erodes the weak rock very quickly. Good examples of this are at Durdle Door and Stair Hole near Lulworth Cove on the Dorset Jurassic Coast in south England, although these are on an area of concordant coastline. When Stair Hole eventually collapses, it will form a cove.
Weather-eroded arches begin their formation as deep cracks which penetrate into a sandstone layer. Erosion occurring within the cracks wears away exposed rock layers and enlarges the surface cracks isolating narrow sandstone walls which are called fins. Alternating frosts and thawing cause crumbling and flaking of the porous sandstone and eventually cut through some of the fins. The resulting holes become enlarged to arch proportions by rockfalls and weathering. The arches eventually collapse leaving only buttresses that in time will erode.
Many weather-eroded arches are found in Arches National Park, Canyonlands National Park, and Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument, all located in southern Utah, United States.
Some natural bridges may look like arches, but they form in the path of streams that wear away and penetrate the rock. Pothole arches form by chemical weathering as water collects in natural depressions and eventually cuts through to the layer below.
Natural Bridges National Monument in Utah protects the area surrounding three large natural bridges all of which were formed by streams running through canyons. The largest of which is named Sipapu Bridge with a span of 225 feet (69 m). The Rainbow Bridge National Monument's namesake was also formed by flowing water which created the largest known natural bridge in the Western Hemisphere with a span of 234 feet (71 m), based on a laser measurement made in 2007. Xianren Bridge, also known as Fairy Bridge, in Guangxi, China is currently the world's largest known natural bridge with a span recorded at 400 feet (120 m) by the Natural Arch and Bridge Society in October 2010, with a precision of ±15 feet (4.6 m).
Natural bridges can form from natural limestone caves, where paired sinkholes collapse and a ridge of stone is left standing in between, with the cave passageway connecting from sinkhole to sinkhole.
Like all rock formations, natural bridges are subject to continued erosion, and will eventually collapse and disappear. One example of this was the double-arched Victorian coastal rock formation, London Bridge, which lost an arch after storms increased erosion.
In a few places in the world, natural arches are truly natural bridges because there are roads or railroads running across them.
In Virginia, US Route 11 traverses the famous Natural Bridge.
Two additional such arches are found in Kentucky. One, a cave erosion arch made of limestone, is located in Carter Caves State Park and it has a paved road on top. Another, a weather-eroded sandstone arch with a dirt road on top is located on the edge of Natural Bridge State Resort Park in Kentucky. It is called White's Branch Arch (also known as the Narrows) and the road going over it is usually referred to as the Narrows Road.
Another is found in Ponoarele Village, in Romania. It is 60 m long, 13 m wide, features a stone arch 4 m thick, 20 m high, with a 9 m span. It is called God's Bridge (Podul lui Dumnezeu) and it is effectively used for traffic.
The railroad from Lima, Peru crosses the Rio Yauli on a natural bridge near kilometer 214.2 as it approaches the city of La Oroya, Peru
Aloba Arch, Chad
Bogenfels, Namibia
Goedehoop natural rock bridge, South Africa
Hole-in-the-Wall, Eastern Cape, South Africa
Wolfberg Arch, Cedarberg mountains, Western Cape, South Africa
Tassili n'Ajjer, national park in Algeria with many arches
Tukuyu natural bridge, Tanzania
Engetsu-tō, Shirahama, Wakayama, Japan
Hazarchishma Natural Bridge, Bamyan Province, Afghanistan
Burdah rock bridge, Wadi Rum, Jordan
Jabal Umm Fruth Bridge, Jordan
Jebel Kharaz, Wadi Rum, Jordan
Moon Hill, Guangxi province, China
Natural Arch, Tirumala hills, Tirumala, India
The Howrah Bridge, Neil Island, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, India
Natural Arch near Badami Caves-Sandstone Hills, Bijapur dist, Karnataka, India
Paradise Point, Pakistan
Punarjani Guha, natural tunnel in Thrissur district of Kerala, India
Arch Cave in the Galilee, Israel
Rock Bridge of Gulanchwadi, Narayangaon, Maharashtra, India
Senkanmatsu-shima, Iwami, Tottori, Japan
Shipton's Arch, Xinjiang, China
Xianren Bridge, China
Arco Naturale, Capri, Italy
Azure Window, Gozo, Malta
Bow Fiddle Rock, Portknockie, Scotland
Castell de Castells, Spain
Chaos de Montpellier-le-Vieux, France
Durdle Door, Dorset, England
Es Pontàs, Spain
Étretat, France
Green Bridge of Wales, Pembrokeshire, Wales
Inland Sea, Gozo, Malta
Kuhstall, Germany
Malá Pravčická brána, Czech Republic
Marvelous Bridges, Bulgaria
Pistyll Rhaeadr, Wales
Podul lui Dumnezeu, Ponoarele, Mehedinţi, Romania
Pont d'Arc, France
Pravčická brána, Czech Republic
Kanjon Vratne, Serbia
Anacapa Island, Channel Islands National Park, California, United States
Arch Creek Historic and Archeological Site, Florida, United States
Arches National Park, Utah, United States
Ayres Natural Bridge State Park, Wyoming, United States
Bell Smith Springs, Illinois, United States
Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah, United States
Corona Arch, Utah, United States
Creelsboro Natural Bridge, Kentucky, United States
El Arco de Cabo San Lucas, Baja California Sur, Mexico
Eye of the Needle (Montana), United States
Goat Rock Beach, California, United States
Grosvenor Arch, Utah, United States
Koger Natural Arch, Kentucky, United States
Kolob Arch, Zion National Park, Utah, United States
Landscape Arch, Utah, United States
Lost Creek Wilderness, Colorado, United States
Natural Bridge, Aruba (collapsed 2005)
Natural Bridge (Virginia), United States
Natural Bridge Caverns, Texas, United States
Natural Bridge Park, Alabama, United States
Natural Bridge State Park (Kentucky), United States
Natural Bridge State Park (Massachusetts), United States
Natural Bridge State Park (Wisconsin), United States
Natural Bridges National Monument, Utah, United States
Natural Bridges State Beach, California, United States
Percé Rock, Quebec, Canada
Rainbow Bridge National Monument, Utah, United States
Rattlesnake Canyon (Colorado), United States
Sewanee Natural Bridge, Tennessee, United States
Sipapu Bridge, Utah, United States
Three Arch Rocks National Wildlife Refuge, Oregon, United States
Tonto Natural Bridge, Arizona, United States
Wrather Arch, Arizona, United States
London Arch, Australia (collapsed 1990)
Mangapohue Natural Bridge, New Zealand
Oparara Basin Arches, New Zealand
Piercy Island, New Zealand
Springbrook National Park, Queensland, Australia
Tolaga Bay and Pourewa Island, New Zealand
Arch Islands, Falkland Islands
Icononzo, Colombia
La Portada, Chile
Puente del Inca, Argentina
Sete Cidades National Park, Brazil
The Arch of Kerguelen, Christmas Harbour, Kerguelen Islands (collapsed ca. 1910)
List of longest natural arches
