Michael David Spivak (born May 25, 1940) is an American mathematician specializing in differential geometry, an expositor of mathematics, and the founder of Publish-or-Perish Press. Spivak is the author of the five-volume A Comprehensive Introduction to Differential Geometry. In 1964 Spivak received a Ph.D. from Princeton University under the supervision of John Milnor. In 1985 he received the Leroy P. Steele Prize.
Spivak was born in Queens, New York.
Spivak has lectured on elementary physics. Spivak's most recent book, Physics for Mathematicians: Mechanics I, which contains the material that these lectures stemmed from and more, was published on December 6, 2010. Spivak is also the designer of the MathTime Professional 2 fonts which are widely used in academic publishing.
Spivak coined Spivak pronouns, a set of English gender-neutral pronouns.
Spivak's book Calculus takes a rigorous and theoretical approach to introductory calculus. It is used in calculus courses, particularly those with a pure mathematics emphasis, at many universities.
Spivak has also written The Joy of TeX: A Gourmet Guide to Typesetting With the AMS-TeX Macro Package and The Hitchhiker's Guide to Calculus. The book Morse Theory, by John Milnor, was based on lecture notes by Spivak and Robert Wells (as mentioned on the cover page of the booklet). Spivak's book Calculus on Manifolds is also rather infamous as being one of the most difficult undergraduate mathematics textbooks. In each of Spivak's books there are hidden references to yellow pigs, an idea Spivak apparently came up with at a bar while drinking with David C. Kelly.
Calculus on Manifolds: A Modern Approach to Classical Theorems of Advanced Calculus, (1965)
Calculus, (1967, 4th ed. 2008)
A Comprehensive Introduction to Differential Geometry, (1979, 3rd ed. 1999)
The Joy of TeX: A Gourmet Guide to Typesetting with the AMS-TeX Macro package, (1990)
A Hitchhiker's Guide to the Calculus, (1995)
Physics for Mathematicians: Mechanics I, (2010)
Stable normal bundle
Spivak pronoun
