Abertis Infraestructuras, S.A. (Spanish pronunciation: [aˈβertis imfɾaestɾukˈtuɾas]) is a Spanish conglomerate corporation. The company runs over 8,000 kilometres of motorways in Europe and America. Abertis manages toll roads and telecommunication infrastructures.
Abertis is part of the IBEX-35 index and is being traded on the Madrid Stock Exchange. Its headquarters are in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
In April 2003, Acesa Infraestructures, a business founded in 1967 as Autopistas, Concesionaria Española S.A., merged with Aurea Concessiones de Infraestructures, a business founded in 1971 as Autopistas de Mare Nostrum (into which Dragados had spun off its own toll roads), to form Abertis.
In December 2003, Abertis acquired Retevision, a leading Spanish radio and television distribution business.
In June 2004, Abertis acquired Iberpistas, another Spanish toll road operator.
In December 2005, Abertis acquired the French toll road operator Sanef.
An attempt initiated in April 2006 to acquire Atlantia (formerly Autostrade), the leading Italian toll road operator, was aborted in January 2008 after opposition from the Italian Government. Abertis intends to sell some of its stake in the company.
On May 19, 2008, Abertis, along with Citi Infrastructure Investors of New York City, submitted a $12.8 billion proposal to lease the Pennsylvania Turnpike in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania for 75 years. However, the consortium withdrew the offer on September 30, 2008 as they felt the proposal would not win approval in the state legislature.
In 2011 Metropistas, an Abertis subsidiary, won the concession for the PR-22 and PR-5 toll roads in Puerto Rico.
In 2012, Abertis acquired Arteris, a Group managing nine toll road concessions in Brazil.
Abertis Infraestructuras
Acesa
Aumar
Iberpistas
Aucat
Aulesa
Avasa
Autema
Sanef
Autopistas de Puerto Rico
Arteris
Invicat
Túnels
Metropistas
Coviandes
Ausol
GCO
Elqui
Rutas del Pacífico
Autopista Central
Autopista Los Libertadores
Autopista del Sol
Autopista de Los Andes
Cellnex Telecom
Retevisión
Tradia
Adesal
Hispasat
Abertis Foundation
Abertis Chairs
