Maxim Integrated is an American, publicly traded company that designs, manufactures, and sells analog and mixed-signal integrated circuits.
Maxim Integrated develops integrated circuits (ICs) for the automotive, industrial, communications, consumer, and computing markets. Headquartered in San Jose, California, the company has design centers, manufacturing facilities, and sales offices throughout the world. In the fiscal year 2015, it had US$2.31 billion in sales, 8,800 employees, and 35,000 customers worldwide. Maxim is a Fortune 1000 company listed on the NASDAQ 100, Russell 1000, and MSCI US indices.
Maxim was founded in April 1983. Its nine initial team members had a variety of experience in semiconductors design and sales. The founding team included Jack Gifford, an industry pioneer since the 1960s; Fred Beck, an IC sales and distribution pioneer; Dave Bingham, General Electric’s Scientist of the Year in 1982; Steve Combs, a pioneer in wafer technologies and manufacturing; Lee Evans, also a pioneer in CMOS analog microchip design and General Electric’s Scientist of the Year in 1982; Dave Fullagar, inventor of the first internally compensated operational amplifier circuit; Roger Fuller, yet another pioneer in CMOS microchip design; Rich Hood, development director for some of the first microprocessor-controlled semiconductor test systems; and Dick Wilenken, who is acknowledged as the father of key analog switch and multiplexer technologies. Based on a two-page business plan, they obtained US$9 million in venture capital to establish the company. In the first year, the company developed 24 second-source products. After that, Maxim designed proprietary products that offered greater differentiation and higher profits.
Maxim recorded its first profitable fiscal year in 1987, with the help of a new successful product called MAX232, and posted a profit every year since it went public in 1988. Annual revenue reached US$500 million in fiscal year 1998 and in fiscal 2011 totaled over US$2.47 billion.
Awards : http://www.maximintegrated.com/company/newsroom/awards/archive.mvp
1990: Purchased first wafer fabrication (fab) facility in Sunnyvale, California.
1994: Acquired Tektronix Semiconductor Division in Beaverton, Oregon, giving Maxim high-speed bipolar processes for wireless RF and fiber-optic products.
1997: Purchased an additional wafer fab from IC Works in San Jose, California, to increase fab capacity.
2001: Acquired Dallas Semiconductor in Dallas, Texas, to gain expertise in digital and mixed-signal CMOS design, as well as an additional wafer fab.
2003: Purchased submicrometre CMOS fab from Philips in San Antonio, Texas, to ramp up capacity and support processes down to the 0.25-micrometre level.
2007: Purchased 0.18-micrometre fab from Atmel in Irving, Texas, approximately doubling fab capacity.
2007: Acquired Vitesse Semiconductor’s Storage Products Division in Colorado Springs, Colorado, adding Serial ATA (SATA), Serial Attached SCSI (SAS), and enclosure-management products to Maxim’s product portfolio.
2008: Acquired Mobilygen in Santa Clara, California, to add H.264 video-compression technology to its portfolio.
2009: Acquired Innova Card, headquartered in La Ciotat, France, for the financial transaction terminal semiconductor market.
2009: Acquired two product lines from Zilog, Inc. Maxim purchased the Secure Transactions product line, featuring the Zatara family of single-chip solutions, and the hardware portion of Zilog's Wireless Control product line, whose Crimzon and classic IR solutions are commonly found in universal remote controls.
2010: Acquired privately held Teridian Semiconductor Corporation for approximately $315 million in cash. Teridian was a fabless semiconductor company located in Irvine, California, supplying systems on a chip (SoC) for the smart meter market.
2010: Maxim acquired the technology and employees of Trinity Convergence Limited, a software company based in Cambridge, U.K. Trinity was part of the ecosystem to bring Skype video conferencing to the LCD TV market.
2010: Maxim acquired Phyworks, a supplier of optical transceiver chips for the broadband communications market.
2011: Maxim acquired SensorDynamics, a semiconductor company that develops proprietary sensor and microelectromechanical (MEMS) solutions.
2012: Maxim acquired Genasic Design Systems Ltd., a fabless RF chip company that makes chips for LTE applications.
2013: Maxim acquired Volterra Semiconductor, a company that develops highly integrated solutions for the enterprise, cloud computing, communications, and networking markets.
Maxim designs, manufactures, and sells highly integrated analog, mixed-signal, high-frequency, and digital circuits. Its product portfolio includes categories serving automotive, industrial, medical, communications, mobile consumer, and computing markets. Maxim’s product lines include: 1-Wire and iButton devices; amplifiers and comparators; analog switches and multiplexers; audio/video; automotive; clock generation and distribution; analog-to-digital converters; digital-to-analog converters; digital potentiometers; analog filters; high-frequency ASICs; hot-swap and power switching; interface and interconnect; memories (volatile, nonvolatile, multifunction); microcontrollers; military/aerospace; optoelectronics; battery and power management; powerline networking; protection and isolation; real-time clocks; reference designs; storage products; microprocessor supervisors; T/E carrier and packetized communications; thermal management; voltage references; wireless, RF, and cable.
From October 2007 to October 2008, Maxim's common stock was delisted from the Nasdaq Stock Exchange due to the company's inability to file financial statements related to stock option backdating. Maxim's stock was traded over-the-counter and quoted on the Pink Sheets until the company completed its restatement in 2008. Maxim's CFO Carl Jasper resigned due to an investigation into the issue by Maxim's board of directors.
Maxim restated its earnings in September 2008 and was relisted on the Nasdaq Stock Exchange on October 8, 2008.
