Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Limited (KHI) (川崎重工業株式会社, Kawasaki Jūkōgyō Kabushiki-gaisha) /kaʊ.əˈsɑːki/ is a Japanese public multinational corporation primarily known as a manufacturer of motorcycles, heavy equipment, aerospace and defense. It has headquarters in both Chūō-ku, Kobe and Minato, Tokyo.
The company is named after its founder Shōzō Kawasaki and has no connection with the city of Kawasaki, Kanagawa. Shōzō Kawasaki's original main base was the city of Kobe, Hyōgo.
Kawasaki is active in a diverse range of the aerospace industry. The Company is a contractor for the Japanese Ministry of Defense and has built aircraft such as the C-1 transport aircraft, T-4 intermediate jet trainer, and the P-3C antisubmarine warfare patrol airplane. It is currently developing two large, next-generation aircraft, the XP-1 maritime patrol airplane and the XC-2 transport aircraft. Kawasaki also builds helicopters, including the BK117, jointly developed and manufactured with MBB. It also produces the CH-47J / JA helicopter.
In the commercial aviation business, the company is involved in the joint international development and production of large passenger aircraft. It is involved in joint development and production of the Boeing 767, Boeing 777 and Boeing 787 with The Boeing Company, and the 170, 175, 190 and 195 jets with Empresa Brasileira de Aeronáutica. It is also involved in the joint international development and production of turbofan engines for passenger aircraft such as the V2500, the RB211/Trent, the PW4000 and the CF34.
Kawasaki also works for the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency. The Company was responsible for the development and production of the payload fairings, payload attach fittings (PAF) and the construction of the launch complex for the H-II rocket. It continues to provide services for the H-IIA rocket.
Kawasaki has also participated in projects such as the development of reusable launch vehicles for spacecraft that will handle future space transport, space robotics projects such as the Japanese Experiment Module for the International Space Station, the HOPE-X experimental orbiting plane and the docking mechanism for the ETS-VII.
Main products
Aircraft
Space systems
Helicopters
Simulators
Jet engines
Missiles
Electronic equipment
Kawasaki is Japan’s largest manufacturer of rolling stock. It began operations in the industry in 1906. It manufactures express and commuter trains, subway cars, freight trains, locomotives, monorails and new transit systems. Kawasaki is also involved in the development and design of high-speed trains such as Japan’s Shinkansen.
Main Products
Electric cars (including Shinkansen trains)
Monorails
Passenger coaches and freight cars
Diesel locomotives
Electric locomotives
Platform screen door systems
Passenger coaches and freight cars integrated transit systems
Kawasaki Shipbuilding Corporation is a wholly owned subsidiary of Kawasaki Heavy Industries. Its product range include high-performance LNG and LPG carriers, container ships, bulk carriers and VLCCs, as well as submarines. The Company is also involved in the development of offshore structures and research vessels.
Kawasaki also produces marine machinery and equipment, including main engines, propulsion systems, steering gears, deck and fishing machinery.
Main products
LNG carriers
LPG carriers
Container ships
High speed vessels
Submarines
VLCCs (Very Large Crude Carriers)
Bulk carriers
Offshore structures
Marine machinery and equipment
Kawasaki's key offering are high-performance gas turbines. The company is also involved in development of new energy sources as an alternative to fossil fuels such as wind power generation, biomass power generation, photovoltaic systems and rechargeable batteries.
Main products
Small and medium-sized gas turbine generators
Gas turbine cogeneration systems
Gas Engines
Wind turbine generators
Ash handling systems
Combined cycle power plants
Nuclear power plant equipment
Boilers
Kawasaki develops and builds a vast array of industrial plants and equipment, including large cement, chemical and nonferrous metal plants, prime movers, and compact precision machinery. It also offers industrial plant engineering from design to sales.
Kawasaki also develops automation systems. Industrial robots for processes such as assembly, handling, welding, painting and sealing, as well as automation systems for distribution and logistics such as automated product- and cargo-handling systems for plants and airports.
Main products
Industrial plants
Industrial robots
Aerodynamic machinery
Hydraulic equipment
Kawasaki is involved in the development of equipment that prevents pollution in a wide range of industries. Among the leading products are fuel gas desulfurization and denitrification systems, and ash handling systems. The Company also supplies municipal refuse incineration plants, gasification and melting systems, sewage treatment and sludge incineration plants.
Kawasaki has also been developing systems that enable a wide range of municipal and industrial waste to be recovered, recycled and put to new use. Such systems include refuse paper and plastic fuel production facilities that convert wastepaper/plastics into an easy-to-handle solid fuel, equipment that converts old tires into highway paving materials and tiles, and machinery that sorts glass bottles by size and color.
Main products
Municipal refuse incineration plans
Water treatment systems
Industrial waste recycling equipment
Flue-gas desulfurization equipment
Kawasaki’s history of building steel structures spans more than a century, with bridge-building among its first businesses. The company offers of storage solutions for LNG,
Kawasaki’s portfolio also includes retractable roofs, floors and other giant structures, the Sapporo Dome's retractable surface is one example.
For construction, Kawasaki produces products such as wheel loaders, tunnel machines, rollers, snowplows and purpose specific loaders. The tunnel boring machines used to excavate the Channel Tunnel and the 14.14 m diameter shield machines used in the Tokyo Bay Aqua-Line construction are two well-known examples.
Main products
Wheel loaders
Construction machinery
Shield Machines
tunnel boring machines
Steel bridges
LNG and LPG tanks
Airport and port-related products
Snowplows
Kawasaki produces motorcycles, jet skis, ATVs and cars. Kawasaki’s motorcycle include the Ninja sport bikes, and cruisers, dual-purpose and motocross motorcycles, as well as utility vehicles, ATVs and general-purpose gasoline engines. Kawasaki's "Jet Ski" has become a genericized trademark for any type of personal watercraft.
Akashi Ship Model Basin Co., Ltd.
Alna Yusoki-Yohin Co., Ltd.
Benic Solution Corp.
EarthTechnica Co., Ltd.
Enetec Co., Ltd.
Fukae Powtec Corp.
JP Steel Plantech Co.
Kawaju Akashi Service Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Engineering Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Oita Manufacturing Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Metal Industries, Ltd.
Kawasaki Setsubi Kogyo Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Shipbuilding Corporation
Kawasaki Plant Systems, Ltd.
Kawasaki Precision Machinery Ltd.
Kawasaki Machine Systems, Ltd.
Kawasaki Motors Corporation Japan
Kawasaki Hydromechanics Corp.
Kawasaki Life Corporation
Kawasaki Naval Engine Service, Ltd.
Kawaju Akashi Engineering Co., Ltd.
KEE Environmental Construction, Co. Ltd.
KEE Environmental Service, Ltd.
Kawaju Gifu Service Co., Ltd.
Kawaju Gifu Engineering Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Prime Mover Engineering Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Construction Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Rolling Stock Technology Co., Ltd.
Kawaju Shoji Co., Ltd.
Kawaju Techno Service Corp.
Kawaju Tokyo Service Corp.
Kawaju Facilitech Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Thermal Engineering Co., Ltd.
K Career Partners Corp.
K-GES Co., Ltd.
K-Tec Corp.
KGM (Kawaju Gifu Manufacturing) Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Setsubi Kogyo Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Construction Machinery, Hokkaido Ltd.
Kawaju Sakaide Service Co., Ltd.
Kawaju Kobe Support Co., Ltd.
Kawaju Marine Engineering Co., Ltd.
KHI JPS Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Shipbuilding Inspection Co., Ltd.
Kawasaki Gas Turbine Research Center Ltd.
Nichijo Manufacturing Co., Ltd.
NIPPI Corporation
Sapporo Kawasaki Rolling Stock Engineering Co., Ltd.
Technica Corp.
Union Precision Die Co., Ltd.
Canadian Kawasaki Motors Inc.
Kawasaki Construction Machinery Corp. of America
Kawasaki Heavy Industries (U.S.A.), Inc.
Kawasaki Motors Corp., U.S.A.
Kawasaki Motors Manufacturing Corp., U.S.A.
Kawasaki Precision Machinery (U.S.A.), Inc.
Kawasaki Rail Car, Inc.
Kawasaki Robotics (U.S.A.), Inc.
Kawasaki do Brasil Indústria e Comércio Ltda.
Kawasaki Machinery do Brasil Maq. Equip. Ltda.
Kawasaki Motores do Brasil Ltda.
Estaleiro Enseada do Paraguaçu S.A.
Kawasaki Marine Machinery Co. Ltd. (Wuhan)
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ship Engineering Co. Ltd. (Nantong, China; COSCO)
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Machinery Trading Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China)
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Technology Co. Ltd. (Dalian, China)
Kawasaki Precision Machinery (China) Ltd.
Kawasaki Robotics Co. Ltd. (Tianjin, China)
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. (Hong Kong)
Kawasaki Machine Systems Ltd. (Korea)
Kawasaki Gas Turbine Asia Sdn. Bhd. (Malaysia)
Kawasaki Motors (Malaysia) Sdn. Bhd. (Malaysia)
Kawasaki Bajaj Motor Ltd. (India)
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Pte. Ltd. (Singapore)
Kawasaki Motors Enterprise Co. Ltd. (Thailand)
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Design & Technical Service, Inc. (Makati, Philippines)
Kawasaki Motors Philippines (Muntinlupa, Philippines)
P.T. Kawasaki Motor (Indonesia)
S n Kawasaki (Pakistan)
Kawasaki Motors Pty. Ltd.
Kawasaki
Kawasaki Precision Machinery (U.K.) Limited
Kawasaki Robotics (U.K.) Ltd.
Kawasaki Robotics G.m.b.H.
Kawasaki Gas Turbine Europe GmbH
Kawasaki Motors Europe N.V.
Kawasaki Heavy Industries Europe Finance B.V.
Kawasaki Heavy Industries (Europe) B.V.
