Bhola Island (also called Dakhin Shahbazpur) is the largest island of Bangladesh with an area of 1441 km². It is most of the land area of Bhola District in Barisal Division.
In August 2015, the island was given the nickname Queen Island of Bangladesh as an effort from the government of Bangladesh for the promotion and marketing of tourism industry.
It is situated at the mouth of the Meghna River. There are ferry and launch services from Dhaka and Barisal.Surges always reshape low-lying Bhola island. The Island is 130 kilometres (81 miles) long. It has a population of 1.7 million. A 1776 guide demonstrated that it was oval yet it is currently more elongated because of disintegration by the Meghna River. Bhola a low lying range which is only 6 feet above ocean level at the most elevated point. Environmental change will affect it and its populace, bringing about expanded disintegration.
Bhola Island is known for its Buffalo curd (doi) which is unique is Bangladesh. The process that has been used has remained unchanged. It is made in traditional clay pots and the process takes 18 hours. It is popular in the Island and is served in special occasions such as weddings, festivals and other special occasions.
The Island has faced chronic power issues, although natural gas was discovered in Shahbazpur in 1994. The government decided to build a Power Plant which is expected to fully operational by August 2015. The state owned Power Grid Company of Bangladesh (PGCB) is installing a high voltage transmission line from Bhola Island to Borhanuddin Island.
There are 14 community radio stations on air.
In 1995, half of the island became flooded, leaving 500,000 people homeless.
In 2005 floods over half a million people were effected in Bhola Island. Enormous surges in the months and years before had added to the serious disintegration and ensuing flood of encompassing streams. Presently large portions of the previous inhabitants are living in the ghettos in Dhaka and other cities.
List of islands of Bangladesh
