Eleuthera /iˈluːθərə/ is an island in the Bahamas, lying 50 miles (80 km) east of Nassau. It is long and thin—110 miles (180 km) long and in places little more than 1 mile (1,600 m) wide. According to the 2000 Census, the population of Eleuthera is approximately 8,000. The name "Eleuthera" is derived from the feminine form of the Greek adjective ἐλεύθερος, eleutheros, i.e. "free".
The topography of the island varies from wide rolling pink sand beaches to large outcrops of ancient coral reefs. The eastern side of the island faces the Atlantic Ocean while the western side faces the Great Bahama Bank, one of the two Bahama Banks.
The original population of Taino, or Arawaks, was mostly deported by the Spanish to work in the mines of Hispaniola, where they died out by 1550. An intact wooden duho or ritual seat that was made by the Taino people was found on the island of Eleuthera in the nineteenth century and is now in the collections of the British Museum. The island is believed to have been unoccupied until the first European settlers—puritan pilgrims—arrived in 1648 from Bermuda. These settlers, known as the "Eleutherian Adventurers", gave the island its current name—ἐλευθερία eleutheria means "freedom" in Greek, while ἐλευθέρα eleuthera means "free". Some people think that Christopher Columbus may have come to Eleuthera before visiting islands in the West Indies.
The settlements include (north to south) the Bluff, Upper and Lower Bogue, Current, Gregory Town, Alice Town, James Cistern, Governor's Harbour, North and South Palmetto Point, Savannah Sound, Winding Bay, Tarpum Bay, Rock Sound, Greencastle, Deep Creek, Delancy Town, Waterford, Wemyss Bight, John Millars, Millar's and Bannerman Town. Airports with regularly scheduled flights are available at North Eleuthera, Governor's Harbour and Rock Sound.
The island was quite prosperous in the period from 1950 to 1980, attracting several prominent American industrialists such as Arthur Vining Davis, Henry J. Kaiser, and Juan Trippe. Frequent visitors included film stars like Robert De Niro as well as Prince Charles and a then pregnant Princess Diana.
When the Bahamas became independent from Britain in 1973, new laws forced all of the large resorts and agricultural businesses to sell to government-favoured Bahamian interests. These repressive polices resulted in the flight of the most prominent and prosperous residents, resulting in a down turn in the economy as businesses were closed and abandoned. Because of the strain of a newly forming country, and unfavourable changes in US tax law, some businesses failed during the period from 1980 to 1985.
Neighboring Harbour Island and Spanish Wells offer unique experiences, but Eleuthera is a destination for those interested in history and nature. Natural attractions include the Glass Window Bridge, Hatchet Bay caves and Surfer's Beach in the north, and Ocean Hole and Lighthouse Beach at the south end. Preacher's Cave on the north end was home to the Eleutherian Adventurers in the mid-17th century, and recent excavations have uncovered Arawak remains at the site.
The principal settlements are Governor's Harbour (the administrative capital), Rock Sound, Tarpum Bay, Harbour Island with its unusual pink sandy beaches and Spanish Wells. The island is particularly noted for the excellence of its pineapples and holds an annual Pineapple Festival in Gregory Town.
Three airports serve the island: North Eleuthera Airport, Governor's Harbour Airport and Rock Sound Airport.
United States Naval Facility (NAVFAC) Eleuthera, Bahamas was commissioned on 1 September 1957, with a complement of 150 officers and enlisted men. A Western Electric engineer and 45 Bahamian employees also supported the base. Adjacent to the NAVFAC was the original site of the first experimental array and electronics which continued in service as an avenue for experiments to bring about improvements in the SOSUS equipment. It was operated by two Western Electric engineers and a few military personnel. As for recreation, Eleuthera is surrounded by warm, crystal clear water filled with fish, making water sports a most popular pursuit. Other entertainment included golfing, spelunking, beach combing, nightly films and the "OAR HOUSE CLUB". NAVFAC Eleuthera was decommissioned 31 March 1980 after 23 years of dedicated service.
The US Air Force Eastern Test Range (ETR) Range Tracking Station No. 4 was sited at Eleuthera AAFB (ELU AUXILIARY AIR FORCE BASE), supported by contractor employees of the Radio Corporation of America (RCA) and Pan American Airways (PAA) in the 1960s and 1970s. This was used by the MISTRAM system.
