Patuakhali (Bengali: পটুয়াখালী) is a district in South-central Bangladesh. It is a part of the Barisal Division.
This is the main entrance for the beach of Kuakata. Famous for watching both the sun rise and sun set, it is called"সাগরকন্যা" The Daughter of Sea.
It is adjacent to the Bay of Bengal. The area of the district is 3220.15 km2.
Patuakhali city is surrounded on three sides by rivers. The two major rivers are Laukathi and Lohalia, which are directly connected with the Bay of Bengal. The city has an inland airport used for transport and private travel across the country.
A number of different tribal peoples live in the district.
re 8 upazilas in this district. They are:
Galachipa Upazil
Dashmina Upazila
Kalapara Upazila
Mirzaganj Upazila
Patuakhali Sadar Upazila
Dumki Upazila
Rangabali Upazila
Deputy Commissioner (DC): Mr. Amitav Sarkar [1]
Superintendent of Police (SP): Mr. Moshfiqur Rahman.[2]
Administrator of Zila Porishod: Mr. Khan Mosharraf Hossain [3]
Agriculture is the profession of the most of the people. Fishing is also a prominent profession of this district. Thousands of boats go into the deep sea to fish and come back with tons of fish. Paddy, Jute, and different types of vegetables are the main product of agriculture sector.
The district of Patuakhali consists 3892 mosques, 187 temples, three Buddhist temples and two churches.
Kuakata, a sea beach offering good views of the Bay of Bengal.
Mirzaganj
Kalaia Bandar (Rice's Hut)
Mohipur (Fishing Boat).
Patuakhali Science and Technology University
Patuakhali Medical College
Patuakhali Polytechnic Institute
Patuakhali Govt College
The city of Patuakhali is situated beside two local rivers: Laukathi River and Lohalia River. During high tides some of the regions of Patuakhali get flooded. The Bay of Bengal is not far from the region.
At the entrance of the city there is a bridge that connects Barisal (the divisional city) with Patuakhali and Kuakata beach.
As Patuakhali is a coastal area, it is affected almost every year by natural disasters like cyclones, floods and tornadoes. To help the disaster-affected people, many NGO's are active in the area. They play a vital role in developing the life style of poor people.
The fruit trees indigenous to Patuakhali district areas as follows:
The Payra seaport currently has two seaports and construction of a third has been started which will gradually be changed to a deep-sea port. The Indian Minister of Shipping Mr. Nitin Gadkari announced in April 2016 that a proposal and detailed report for a port at Payra in Bangladesh have been completed. India and Bangladesh will set up a high-level committee to work out details, including investment details.
Districts of Bangladesh
Barisal Division
Afalkati
