Cayo District is a district in the west of the nation of Belize. The district capital is the town of San Ignacio.
The Cayo District is the largest in Belize. It is located on the western side of the country which borders Guatemala. The nation's capital, Belmopan, is in the district. Also in the Cayo district the town of Benque Viejo del Carmen and the twin towns of San Ignacio and Santa Elena are located. The district has many villages such as Seven Miles (El Progresso), San Antonio, Valley of Peace, St. Margaret, Roaring Creek, Armenia, San Jose Succotz, Arenal, Buena Vista, Bullet Tree Falls, Calla Creek, Esperanza, Cristo Rey, Georgeville, Unitedville, Blackman Eddy, Ontario, Camalote, Los Tambos, More Tomorrow and Spanish Lookout.
The southern half of the Cayo District is very sparsely populated. A large majority of the district's population lives north of the 17th parallel.
The Cayo District contains the Pre-Columbian Maya ruins of Xunantunich, Cahal Pech, Chaa Creek, and Caracol. Major rivers in the district include the Macal River and the Mopan River.
The Cayo District is primarily an agricultural district, with the chief crops being citrus fruit (more specifically, oranges, grapefruit, and tangerine), as well as bananas. Recently oil was found in Spanish Lookout and is now in production. There are 2 major highways in the District. The George Price Highway runs from Belize City to the Guatemalan border, and the Hummingbird Highway which starts in Belmopan and ends at the juncture of the Coastal Road and the Southern Highway in the Stann Creek District. In addition to the ruins listed above there are several other important nature reserves including two National Parks, Blue Hole (park) and Guanacaste National Park. Ecotourism is also an integral part of the region's economy.
Politically, Cayo is divided into six constituencies, described in detail here:
Belmopan: Current representative John Saldivar (UDP)
Cayo Central: Current representative Rene Montero (UDP)
Cayo North: Current representative Omar Figueroa (UDP)
Cayo North East: Current representative Elvin Penner (UDP)
Cayo South: Current representative Julius Espat (PUP)
Cayo West: Current representative Erwin Contreras (UDP)
A number of Mayan archaeological sites lie within the Cayo District. Among these are Caracol, Xunantunich, Cahal Pech, Baking Pot, Lower Dover and El Pilar.
According to the 2010 Population and Housing Census, Cayo District's total population is 73,202 residents; of this, 36,803 are males and 36,399 are females. The total number of households is 15,497 and the average household size is 4.7.
In 2000, Cayo District had a population of 53,715 people.
In 2010, the total population in Cayo's urban areas was 36,455; 17,939 males and 18,516 females. 7,468 total households and a 4.9 average household size. The total population in Cayo's rural areas was 36,747; 18,864 males and 17,883 females. 8,029 total households and a 4.6 average household size.
The Lodge at Chaa Creek
Ka'ana Boutique Resort & Spa
