Jay and Silent Bob are fictional characters portrayed by Jason Mewes and Kevin Smith, respectively, in Kevin Smith's View Askewniverse, a fictional universe created and used in most of the films, comics, and television programs written and produced by Smith, beginning with Clerks.
Jay and Silent Bob have appeared in most of Smith's films, with the exceptions of Jersey Girl, Zack and Miri Make a Porno, Cop Out, Red State, Tusk and Yoga Hosers. The characters are shown spending most of their time selling marijuana in front of the convenience store in the Clerks films. In Clerks: The Animated Series, they were also shown selling illegal fireworks.
Jay and Silent Bob are characters who were born in Leonardo, New Jersey in the 1970s, according to Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back. They met as infants in front of Quick Stop Groceries while their mothers shopped inside The Record Rack, which would eventually become RST Video.
Silent Bob's distinguishing features are his heavy smoking, long coat, dark hair, beard, and backwards baseball cap. He was raised Catholic, and is a gadgetry genius. True to his name, Silent Bob rarely speaks, but when he does, he often has something articulate or clever to say, delivering insightful monologues to the other characters only in appropriate situations (minus one instance where Jay was so oblivious to the obvious clue needed to find a lost orangutan that Silent Bob grabbed him and shouted, "The sign on the back of the car said 'Critters of Hollywood,' you dumb fuck!"): in Clerks II, when Dante complains that the two never say anything intelligent, Jay calls for Silent Bob to "do his thing," to which Silent Bob can only say "I got nothing." Otherwise he relies on hand gestures and facial expressions to communicate. Silent Bob is often annoyed by Jay and when Silent Bob does speak, he will sometimes ridicule Jay, particularly in Chasing Amy (in which Silent Bob gave his longest speech) and in Clerks II (where he points out when he speaks he usually says something intelligent, whereas Jay says something stupid). In Clerks: The Animated Series, Silent Bob is called "Blutarsky", but according to Smith, that was a joke referencing Animal House and he never gave Silent Bob a last name.
Jay is thinner and slightly taller than Silent Bob, and has long, blond hair. In several of the later View Askewniverse films, Jay wears a black tuque. In contrast to Silent Bob, Jay speaks frequently and rudely and often treats people with disrespect or hostility, including Silent Bob. Jay's excessive cursing seems due to influence from his overbearing mother, who is shown continually using profanity in front of him. His first word was "fuck". In Clerks, the first film to feature the duo, Jay wears a baseball cap. He is also very active in trying to seduce several women.
Kevin Smith has stated that he sees Jay as ambisexual: "Jay—who's always talking about women—is a character a lot of young hetero guys identify with. But I think Jay's really ambisexual. So it's nice to throw them a curveball to open up their perspective a bit. If I can lead a few cats into being a bit more tolerant, I feel pretty good." In issue #2 of the Chasing Dogma comic series, Jay launches into a lengthy and thoroughly impassioned impromptu speech on gay rights and tolerance before he notices Silent Bob's astonished expression and brushes the matter off. In Dogma, 13th Apostle Rufus asserts that Jay masturbates more than anyone else, and that he thinks about men when doing so; in response to Silent Bob's shocked expression, Jay claims merely that he does not 'always' think of men during self-stimulation. Moreover, in the prison scene in Clerks II, Jay wants Dante and Randal to fellate each other in exchange for Silent Bob and him loaning them the money to reopen the Quick Stop and RST. He may say this merely to get Dante and Randal to humiliate themselves, but after Silent Bob's disgusted look, he retracts the demand. In a cut version of the same scene, Silent Bob tells Jay that he is a deeply repressed gay man.
Clerks, released in 1994, is the first film to feature Jay and Silent Bob. In the View Askewniverse continuity, it takes place the day after Mallrats. Jay and Silent Bob return to their primary business location in front of Quick Stop. Throughout the day, they are seen dancing, loitering, and harassing passersby. Silent Bob enters the store to buy powdered sugar while Jay goes inside to steal food. They also deal marijuana to various pedestrians (including Willam Black), much to the chagrin of Quick Stop clerk Dante Hicks. In addition, the duo hangs out with Silent Bob's Russian cousin Olaf, who runs a heavy metal band and is looking to do a gig in New York City.
Aware of Dante's dilemma with Caitlin Bree and Veronica, Silent Bob says to him, "You know, there's a million fine-looking women in the world, dude. But they don't all bring you lasagna at work. Most of 'em just cheat on you."
The end credits of Clerks contains a reference to the return of Jay and Silent Bob in Dogma.
Although it was filmed one year later, the events in Mallrats, released in 1995, occur one day before the events in Clerks. In the film, Jay and Silent Bob are busy loitering at a local New Jersey mall (filmed in Minnesota at the Eden Prairie Center Mall). There they are met by Brodie (Jason Lee) and T.S. (Jeremy London), who have broken up with their girlfriends—Rene (Shannen Doherty) and Brandi (Claire Forlani), respectively. As fate would have it, a local game show called Truth or Date, which is set to feature Brandi, is to be filmed at the mall that day. Brodie asks Jay and Silent Bob to make sure the show does not happen, and Jay says they were going to destroy the stage anyway, for lack of anything better to do.
They make several attempts to destroy the stage, but ultimately fail. Later, they help Brodie and T.S. win back their girlfriends. Jay incapacitates the male contestants on Truth or Date by getting them stoned, which allows Brodie and T.S. to take their places. Silent Bob overrides the production's video input, allowing him to play a video tape of Rene's new boyfriend, Shannon Hamilton (Ben Affleck), having sex with a minor. The film concludes with Brodie and T.S. reconciling with their respective girlfriends and Jay and Silent Bob walk off into the distance with an orangutan named Susanne.
In this film, Silent Bob is an electronics genius and won a science fair in eighth grade by turning his mother's vibrator into a CD player using "chicken wire and shit".
After the credits roll, Jay and Silent Bob are announced to return in Chasing Amy.
Chasing Amy, released in 1997, reveals that in the years since the events of Clerks, Jay and Silent Bob have found out that comic book artists Holden McNeil (Ben Affleck) and Banky Edwards (Jason Lee) created a popular independent comic book series entitled Bluntman and Chronic which stars the duo.
This film centers around Holden's romantic relationship with Alyssa Jones (Joey Lauren Adams), a self-identified lesbian. Though their love is initially strong, the relationship begins to deteriorate when Holden discovers Alyssa's past. Toward the end of the film, Jay and Silent Bob meet Holden to accept their likeness rights payment, and during this meeting, Silent Bob tells Holden the story of his former girlfriend, Amy.
Silent Bob explains, in his longest speech to date, that much like in Holden's relationship with Alyssa, he became uncomfortable at the revelation of Amy's sexual past, specifically that she had engaged in a threesome. Upon discovering this, he broke up with her, only to realize much later that he was wrong. He was not angry at her; rather, he felt inadequate and insecure, as if he would never be enough given his lack of experience, but by the time he realized this, it was too late, and she had moved on. He has since spent his life "chasing Amy, so to speak".
Inspired by Silent Bob's story, Holden devises a plan to fix his relationship with Alyssa, but as in Silent Bob's past relationship, it is too late. Holden passes the reins of power over the Bluntman and Chronic comic and creates a new comic named Chasing Amy, based on the relationship.
The end credits of Chasing Amy again contain a reference to the return of Jay and Silent Bob in Dogma.
The events in Dogma, released in 1999, take place after their disappointing adventure in the fictional Shermer, Illinois (the events of which are chronicled in the comic book story "Chasing Dogma"). Jay and Silent Bob decide to go back home to New Jersey. Before they leave, they meet Bethany Sloane (Linda Fiorentino), a Roman Catholic abortion clinic worker who has lost her faith in God.
Though she is unaware of the fact, Bethany is the last living relative of Jesus. She has been charged with the holy quest of stopping two fallen angels, Bartleby (Ben Affleck) and Loki (Matt Damon), from entering a church in New Jersey. The two angels were expelled from Heaven after Loki got extremely drunk, quit his position as the Angel of Death, and gave God the finger; they realize that they can exploit a doctrinal loophole and get back into heaven if they lose their wings, are absolved of their sins, and then die by some means other than suicide. Bartleby reasons that entering the church in New Jersey will automatically forgive all of their sins, as total remission of sins had been granted to whomever visited that specific church on a specific date, thus allowing them to return to Heaven. Though they do not know it, if the two were to return to heaven this way, they would overturn God's decision, thus "proving God wrong" and unmaking all of existence. The Metatron (Alan Rickman) tells Bethany that she is to follow two people who refer to themselves as "prophets". This turns out to be Jay and Silent Bob, who rescue Bethany from her attackers. She believes they are the prophets by Jay's statement that he "could have stayed in Jersey and at least made himself a 'profit'". Though initially only interested in sex, Jay and Silent Bob agree to let her come with them.
Jay and Silent Bob fill out their roles as prophets: they predict the arrival of Rufus (Chris Rock), the 13th apostle, who was left out of the Bible because he was black; they lead the others to former Muse Serendipity (Salma Hayek); they procure the divine instrument that will stop Azrael; Jay reveals the location of God ("John Doe Jersey"); and ultimately, though inadvertently, they provide Bethany with the solution to preventing Armageddon. The Apostle Rufus reveals that Jay entertains homosexual fantasies when masturbating; Jay attempts to reassure a disturbed Silent Bob by explaining that he does not 'always' think about men. During the journey, they also encounter the two angels, and a host of demons who (in rebellion against Hell) are trying to help the angels cause the end of the world. Silent Bob also speaks, a comical line after throwing the rebel angels off a moving train, then being awkwardly stared at by a shocked and confused passenger. ("No ticket", a reference to Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade).
Once at the church, Jay and Silent Bob, along with the others, try to stop the angels from entering. Loki has a change of heart and tries to help them out, but is killed by Bartleby in the process. Though their efforts to fight Bartleby are unsuccessful (in fact, Jay accidentally helps Bartleby out by shooting his wings off with a MAC-10, turning him to a mortal), God (Alanis Morissette) arrives, and proceeds to set things in order. After Jay spouts an obscenity-filled tirade on Serendipity and Rufus, the movie ends with Jay suggesting that Silent Bob and he take Bethany to the Quick Stop.
The ending credits claim that Jay and Silent Bob would return in Clerks II.
Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, released in 2001, takes place eight years after the events of Clerks. Due to their excessive noise-making and drug dealing, Randal Graves files a restraining order against Jay and Silent Bob that prohibits them from coming within 100 feet of the Quick Stop or RST Video. Having no place to loiter, they decide to pay a visit to Brodie (Jason Lee), where they learn that Miramax Films is making a Bluntman and Chronic film.
They visit Holden McNeil, co-creator of the characters, and ask for the money that belongs to them for using their likenesses in the film, only to find out that he sold his half of the rights to Bluntman and Chronic to the other co-creator, Banky Edwards (also Lee); after Holden introduces them to the internet, they also discover that a number of people have bashed the upcoming film and insulted Jay and Silent Bob numerous times. Jay and Silent Bob decide that they must defend their honor, and embark on a road trip to Hollywood to stop the movie from being made and protect their reputations.
After being refused passage on a bus for not having tickets, they decide to hitchhike there, and stop at a local Mooby's restaurant, whereupon Jay falls victim to love at first sight with Justice (Shannon Elizabeth), an international jewel thief posing as an animal rights activist. Justice offers them a ride under the pretense that they are traveling cross country to release animals from an animal-testing facility, much to the chagrin of her partners Chrissy (Ali Larter), Missy (Jennifer Schwalbach Smith), and Sissy (Eliza Dushku).
Once inside the facility, Jay and Silent Bob find a tranquilizer gun and the ape, an orangutan named Suzanne (a reference to the ending scene in "Mallrats"). After springing her from her cage, Silent Bob becomes sympathetic for the other animals, so they let them loose, as well. In the meantime, the four women escape with the diamonds and place a bomb on the van; Jay and Silent Bob witness the van explode, and while assuming that Justice is dead, they manage to escape just as the authorities arrive.
Federal Wildlife Marshall Willenholly (Will Ferrell) arrives to take over the case, as it involves the release of animals. Suzanne is subsequently taken by the occupants of a car labeled “Critters of Hollywood”. Jay laments that they will never see Suzanne again, only to have Silent Bob angrily, and loudly, explain that the sign on the car (also calling Jay a dumbfuck for not getting what Silent Bob's gesturing right after Suzanne was stolen was about) indicated that they will probably meet up with her in Hollywood.
They are eventually able to hitch a ride and make it to Hollywood. There, they evade a security guard (Diedrich Bader) and make their way through multiple movie sets, including Good Will Hunting 2: Hunting Season. They are reunited with Suzanne on the set of the then-fictional Scream 4, where Suzanne is playing the part of a masked killer.
Pursued by a group of security guards, they are able to escape by riding a bicycle over a ramp (a reference to the iconic E.T., the Extra-Terrestrial moon scene), propelling them through the window of a nearby building. By sheer luck, they land in the dressing room of James Van Der Beek (of Dawson's Creek) and Jason Biggs (of American Pie), who happen to be playing Jay and Silent Bob in The Bluntman and Chronic Movie; Silent Bob is somewhat upset that his comic-book counterpart is being played by the "pie fucker".
After learning this, Jay and Bob form a huddle in the corner and decide to beat up Biggs and Van Der Beek, but while their backs are turned, Suzanne does this for them. Jay and Silent Bob then give the ape the tranquilizer gun and set her loose in the ventilation ducts.
They put on the Bluntman and Chronic outfits, so they will not be noticed, but are mistaken for Biggs and Van Der Beek, and are escorted to the set of the movie. Despite the fact that they do not know what they are doing, once on set, filming begins. Jay and Silent Bob battle with Bluntman and Chronic's nemesis, Cockknocker (Mark Hamill), eventually cutting off his hand.
At this point, Justice enters the set to confess her love for Jay and admits her profession as a professional jewel thief; a nonchalant Jay forgives her and they kiss. Willenholly reappears with a shotgun, soon followed by Missy, Chrissy, and Sissy. Justice and Sissy fight hand-to-hand, while Missy and Chrissy get into a gun battle with Willenholly.
During the commotion, Jay and Silent Bob locate Banky Edwards and demand their money; after Banky refuses, Silent Bob breaks his silence and explains why Banky can be sued if he does not acquiesce to their demands. Banky finally agrees to give them half of whatever he makes from the movie.
After the fight, Willenholly stands up, believing he has killed Missy and Chrissy. Suzanne takes this opportunity to shoot him in the buttocks with a tranquilizer dart, incapacitating him; Justice uses the situation to her advantage and offers Willeholly an opportunity to get into the FBI by turning herself in along with Missy, Sissy, and Chrissy, as long as she gets a reduced sentence and the charges against Jay and Silent Bob are dropped. He agrees and Justice tells Jay to wait for her.
Banky approaches Jay and Silent Bob and tells them that they are now rich. Jay expresses his displeasure at the fact that, despite all of their efforts, they were still unable to stop the internet insults. They decide that the only way to achieve this, using their newfound wealth, is to visit and beat up everyone who had insulted them to the tune of "Kick Some Ass" by Stroke 9.
The ending credits claim that Jay and Silent Bob "have left the building".
Thirteen years after the events in Clerks, and five years after the events in Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, Clerks II, released in 2006, takes place. Now in their early 30s, Jay and Silent Bob had recently bought a car, but they were pulled over for driving with a deployed airbag. During the search, the police found a stash of marijuana and they were sentenced to six months of rehabilitation, where they become devout sober Christians.
Once out of rehab, they are clean, but continue to deal while trying to teach the word of God, in a manner similar to evangelists. In one scene, Jay even suggests to a couple of buyers that they should read the "Holy Fucking" Bible. The Quick Stop where Dante worked was burned in a fire due to Randal leaving the coffee pot on, and Randal and he moved over to the Mooby's fast food restaurant. Jay and Silent Bob follow them there. In the beginning of the film, Jay expresses some disillusionment at being a drug dealer and weighs on other ideas of what to do in life.
At one point during the movie, Jay, knowing boredom is the first step to relapse, dances to the song "Goodbye Horses" by Q Lazzarus after Silent Bob puts the tape in the boom box. He parodies exactly the same dance done by Buffalo Bill in The Silence of the Lambs, complete with the "tuck", although it is alleged Jay has been doing this in real life before Silence of the Lambs came out.
Near the end of the film, they are jailed with Dante, Elias, and Randal, in which the latter hired a donkey show to celebrate Dante moving away. Jay and Silent Bob were charged for possession of drugs, which violated their probation. They bear witness to Dante and Randal's fight in the jailhouse, but at first provide no meaningful help, with Silent Bob unable to come up with his usual wisdom and instead criticizing Jay for never contributing to a conversation. Randal wants to reopen the Quick Stop with Dante, but neither of them has the money, so Jay and Silent Bob offer them some of the Bluntman and Chronic movie royalty money under the condition that the two are allowed to loiter outside the shop and that the police cannot be called to arrest them. After the Quick Stop is reopened, Jay and Silent Bob return to where they started so many years ago.
The two are the stars of the 2013 animated comedy film.
Kevin Smith said in 2013, in a Reddit Ask me Anything that the duo would appear in Clerks III.
On July 2, 2014, at Colston Hall as part of the Jay & Silent Bob's Super Groovy Cartoon Movie tour, Kevin Smith said that the next appearance of the duo would be in Clerks III, and that they hoped to begin filming in the summer of 2015.
Production was originally set to begin in May 2015, but was put on hold in favor of shooting Mallrats 2 first.
Kevin Smith has said that the duo will appear in Moose Jaws the last of his True North trilogy. It has also been pointed out by Smith that his beloved character, Silent Bob will be eaten by the vicious Moose, killing off the character.
Clerks: The Animated Series continues Jay and Silent Bob’s adventures in front of the Quick Stop with Dante and Randal. In one episode, Jay and Silent Bob sell illegal fireworks instead of drugs. These events are not necessarily continuous with events depicted elsewhere in the View Askewniverse. Silent Bob follows the film format and only speaks once during the episodes. In the show, it is revealed that Jay is 26 years old (a year younger than Dante and Randal), but still in the fourth grade, having been held back "a lot".
In most of the episodes, Jay and Silent Bob have some public service announcement videos, where they talk about safety tips, science lessons, or magic tricks. When they introduce themselves to kids, Charles Barkley also appears, but is immediately shooed away by Jay. In the "Science Sez" skit, Barkley attempt to tell a kid the importance of science, when Jay and Silent Bob arrive and beat him up, reminding him that only they do the segments.
In the series' final episode "The Last Episode Ever", Jay is revealed to be the show's animator, as he constantly redraws the physical forms of Dante and Randal (similar to one of Bugs Bunny's antics in Looney Tunes) toward the end of the episode.
In March 2015, Smith announced that he was in the process of creating Mallrats 2 and that a majority of the cast had already signed on to return for the sequel. In April 2015, it was confirmed that production of the film would begin in late 2015 and would be Smith's next project. Smith said, "we were talking about initially shooting Clerks III this summer and then we were going to get to Mallrats in the beginning of 2016. And then it jumped into 2015, where we were going to shoot Clerk’s and then hopefully Mallrats before the end of the year. But now, based on a f—ing mall that we all dig that will be going away, the priority has become Mallrats. So, the next f—ing movie I’m making is Mallrats 2."  In June 2016 he revealed that the project was being called MallBrats, and would be a 10 episode television series.
The two appear in many of the Clerks comics in supporting roles.
In Clerks: The Comic Book, Jay and Silent Bob's drug dealing is compromised by the recent popularity of Star Wars action figures. In an attempt to strike up business, the two hijack a toy store delivery truck and drive it into a secret compound behind the store. The two sell the figures at extremely low prices, ruining their value.
In Clerks The Holiday Special, the two are seen working for Santa Claus, who is working in the apartment in between the Quick Stop and RST Video. The duo works on the toy-making machines.
In Clerks: The Lost Scene, the two are seen in the bookend segments of the comic, which parodied the "Tales from the Crypt" comic books.
In between the events of Chasing Amy and Dogma, Jay and Silent Bob decide to go to be the "blunt connection" in Shermer, Illinois, (where most of John Hughes' films are set) because they believe that all the guys there are jerks and that there would be girls crawling all over them. They discover in Chicago that Shermer, Illinois, does not exist.
Since many of the events were reused in the 2001 film Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, not all the events depicted here are necessarily continuous with those depicted elsewhere in the View Askewniverse.
In February 2016, Interabang announced the development of Jay and Silent Bob: Chronic Blunt Punch, a beat 'em up video game in the style of Castle Crashers featuring the title characters fighting through miscreants in the "mall of purgatory" down the street from the Quik Stop. In addition to combat, the game includes a means to use insults as finishing moves in combat. The game is being developed with input from Smith and considered part of the View Askewniverse. Interabang used the Fig crowdfunding to raise $400k to complete the title, which successfully raised over $435,000 at the completion of the campaign.
Scream 3 (cameo) (Note: While their appearance in Scream 3 suggests that the Scream series and the View Askewniverse are on the same plane of existence, other factors may contradict this; in the first Scream film, a VHS tape of Clerks is shown in the background; also, in Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, Jay and Silent Bob see the filming of the then fictional Scream 4. However, there is also a Clerks hat seen in Mallrats, which is officially part of the View Askewniverse).
Drawing Flies (Kevin Smith is credited as Silent Bob in the film. Jason Mewes also appears in the film, but as a different character. Smith's character wears the same leather outfit he wore in Mallrats)
Fanboys (cameo) Not actually "Jay and Silent Bob", they are a close facsimile. (The roles were reversed. Smith's character was hanging out in front of the gas station bathroom, pimping out Jason Mewes' character.)
MTV's Jay and Silent Bob Shorts
VH1’s I Love the '90s ("Jay and Silent Bob Re-name Your Favorite TV Show" and "Guys We'd Go Gay For")
Degrassi: The Next Generation (appeared (with Alanis Morissette) for the filming of the fictional film Jay and Silent Bob Go Canadian, Eh? over three episodes in the fourth season, and returned for two episodes of the fifth season for the film's world premiere).
Yes, Dear season 4, episode 19, Kevin Smith appears as himself in the show, but in the end does a little skit as Silent Bob.
Jay and Silent Bob made a brief appearance in one panel of Green Arrow (vol. 3) #6, standing outside Jason Blood's Safe House in Star City. This issue was written by Kevin Smith during his 15-issue run on the title character.
Demonic versions of Jay and Silent Bob can be seen in one panel on the second page of Angel: After the Fall issue #5, standing outside of a cafe in the safe haven of Silverlake. Writer Brian Lynch confirmed the reference and attributed their inclusion to artist Franco Urru.
They also appeared in the Star Wars Infinities comic Tag and Bink where they say they are from the Jedi Council.
In a 2005 issue of Total Film, a comic strip illustrating Kevin Smith's version of the Passion of the Christ was published, featuring Jay and Silent Bob in the final panel.
In 2001, The New York Times ran a comic book telling how Smith met and first kissed his wife Jennifer Schwalbach Smith. Jay and Silent Bob appear in one panel, promoting the then-forthcoming film Jay & Silent Bob Strike Back.
Jay and Silent Bob made a cameo in issue #79 of Terry Moore's long-running comic book Strangers in Paradise.
They also appear in a Desperate Times comic strip included in issue #53 of Savage Dragon.
"Can't Even Tell" by Soul Asylum
"Build Me Up Buttercup" by The Goops
"Because I Got High" by Afroman
"Kick Some Ass" by Stroke 9
"Problem" by Nova Rockafeller
"You Can't Stop Me" by Suicide Silence (Jay only).
