Genie in the House is a British sitcom broadcast on Nickelodeon UK about a widowed father (Philip) with two teenage daughters (Emma and Sophie) who find a dusty old golden lamp while exploring the loft of their new home. A quick rub of the lamp releases Adil, a trainee genie from Balamkadaar who has been confined to life in the lamp for 1000 years. Philip has banned any use of magic in the house, yet the girls and Adil the Genie find ways to get themselves into trouble using Adil's wish granting powers.
The show ran for four seasons from May 2006 to December 2010. As of March 2012, Genie in the House is now airing on the Starz Kids & Family cable network. A theatrical movie was also planned for release in 2014, but after spending over three years in development hell, was cancelled. The official website of the series has also been shut down.
The show is based on an original idea — the collective work of Phil Ox, Steven Bawol, Isabelle Dubernet and Eric Führer — and is a French/English co-production, produced in English by French company Moi j'aime la television. At one point, You Wish! was considered as a working title, and was used for the pilot show, but it was discovered that there had been an American sitcom, You Wish, with the same name, so Genie in the House was chosen instead.
The show's theme song was written especially for the show, with music by Jean de Aguiar and lyrics by Kevin Eldon. It is sung by Vicky Longley and Katie Sheridan, the actresses who play Emma and Sophie in the show.
Series 1 was recorded at Elstree Film and Television Studios in Borehamwood, Hertfordshire and was first aired on 29 May 2006. It is currently being repeated on Nickelodeon in the UK. Series 2 started recording at the BBC Elstree Centre in Borehamwood on 29 June 2007, for broadcast in October 2007. The show has been sold, sometimes in dubbed form, to Turkey, France, Belgium, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Russia, Ukraine, India, The Netherlands and Germany. Filming for the third and final series took place at Twickenham Film Studios, London and began in June 2008 ending with a 3 part story 'The Legend of The Dragon', filmed on location in Paris and the surrounding countryside.
There's a Genie in the House by Lorraine PearsonTropical Girl by Kevin McDermott and in double trouble with The Ashley BThe Pineapple Song by Ayshea
Adil was born in the fourth century in the suburbs of the city of Balamkadaar. He has the outward appearance of being 15 years old, but has actually lived for 1500 years. His father was a genie (to be found today in a bottle of pop at the bottom of the Nile) and his mother was a teacher of the Dance of the Seven Veils. Like all children, Adil went to school, only his was a Genie School, the world famous School for Genie Arts and Sciences. Adil was not a perfect student. One day he climbed into a lamp for a dare, strictly forbidden for first year students, and got himself stuck. Unfortunately the forty thieves chose that very night to burgle the school and steal the lamp. Forgotten for a hundred years or so in Ali Baba's cave, the lamp eventually passed from hand to hand, before ending up in the attic of the Norton family's new home. Adil is proud to be a genie and is always ready to serve his new master and mistresses. But he does have a problem. Unfortunately, he often skipped his classes and never finished the academic year. Because of this, he has not quite got the hang of magic, and does not always — actually, almost never — get things right, and most wishes are granted more or less 'approximately'. Adil is played by Jordan Metcalfe. Adil is always at the root of whatever is going on, and his costume (red pantaloons, red waistcoat and red turban) rarely changes.
Philip has his hands full. Though he is a talented and successful designer, he constantly has to meet the deadlines set by his boss, Max, as well as bringing up two teenage girls. Add an over-eager genie to the mix and it's no wonder that Philip sometimes feels a little bit put upon. However, given the chaos of living with world's worst genie, Philip seems to be coping rather well.
Adil is categorically forbidden to grant Emma and Sophie wishes for three reasons:
It's a very bad habit to get what you want simply by clicking your fingers.
If anyone finds out there is a genie in the house, life could become very difficult.
Adil usually grants wishes incorrectly, whereafter there has to be dealt with troublesome consequences.
If the girls break this rule, he has no hesitation in using the full range of traditional punishments. He'll ground his daughters, withhold their pocket money or forbid them from staying at their aunt's house in the country, or all of the above. Despite his dislike of magic, Philip seems to like Adil as a person! The genie's presence means that Philip is no longer the only man in the house, and gives him someone to watch sport with on the TV and play Tennis by also having fun at the same time. He has encouraged Adil to become a football fan, an F1 fan, a fan of the Olympic Games... in fact he has made him a fan of every single sport you can watch. But if Adil does break the rule and grant his daughters their wishes, he is severely punished, the most effective punishment is being locked up in the lamp for an entire weekend. Philip has forbidden his daughters to use Adil's services and extends that ban to himself. But you never know what might happen in the future and it's extremely likely that one day, he just might crack.
The older of the sisters. Passionate about what makes the world tick, Sophie's favourite lessons are physics, chemistry, history and geography and she would love to go to university and to study as many subjects and languages as possible. She apparently doesn't like drama,however. Days off, weekends and holidays are full of activities, sports, and educational visits of all kinds. She is not particularly interested in romance, often being oblivious to the attentions of boys until Emma 'kindly' points out her crush on her boyfriend Clive. Sophie thinks Adil is great but at times clueless. He never, ever stops asking questions and Sophie just loves to answer as many as she can. Although she doesn't like it, on several occasions she has defied her father by making wishes, and has decided that if she's going to risk breaking her father's rules, she must take the utmost care.She is played by Katie Sheridan
Younger of the two sisters by a year, Emma finds schoolwork intensely boring unlike her sister. She manages to get by at school without too much difficulty, but without any brilliance either. She does appear to enjoy reading, but much prefers a good story to boring facts and figures in textbooks. Her days off, her weekends and holidays are organised around going to see a film with her friends, spending hours painting, shopping, designing, singing (although she is no good), watching TV, going to parties, dating, dancing or moving the furniture around in her room... She loves her friends and her favourite topic of conversation is boys. She at times gets on well with Adil especially since she loves to hear his wacky stories, whether they are true or not. Although she knows the risks of Adil's botching magic they do not faze her; indeed, she seems to get some fun out of the ridiculous situations his magic gets them into. She loves designing clothes and dreams of becoming a top fashion designer.
Philip's helping hand around the house and with the girls. Although technically she lived next door, she managed to persuade Philip years ago to give her a key to the house so she could come and go as necessary. Her character was introduced as a possible love interest for Philip, but it was felt that this was more of a hindrance than a help to his character. Caroline was not brought back for the next two series and her character is referred to as having recently moved to France and married. It is possibly that the actress who played her did not renew her contract.
Abdab (Nicholas Khan) (series 1-2)
Aisha (Leyla Pellegrini)
Alex Delaney (Shamus Iqbal)
Ali Baba (Peter Peralta)
Amak (Miss Spinelli's Intut Husband) (Tom Kenny) Note: Miss Spinelli and Amak are apparently able to speak fluent Intut.
Anabell Scott (Hannah Tointon) (Series 1)
Bonnie Swift (Georgia Slowe)
Clive (Darren John) (Series 2-4)
Dancer (Pixie Lott) (Series 1 Episode 14)
Djamola (Deborah Alobah)
Elmer Norton (Glyn Angell) (series 3)
Frank McCartney (David McMullen)
Harold (Jack Blumenau) (series 1)
Hunk (Glyn Angell)
Jamilla (Susan Kyd)
Lady Isabella (Elizabeth Conboy)
Len (Alexander Wilson)
Lindy Lou (Kristal Archer)
Mamoun (Matthew Leitch)
Melissa Fox (Ellen Lister) (series 2)
Miss Mayer (Katy Bartrop)
Mr Hull(Richard Freeman)
Mr Preston (Philip Fox)
Mr Ying (Mako) Note: He can speak fluent Japanese .
Mr. Osterman (Johnnie Lyne-Pirkis) Note: He was born in Austria .
The Mummy (Tom Underwood)
Nanette (Olivia Caffrey)
Nev (Harry Lloyd)
One of The Rejects (Danielle Mitchell)
One of The Rejects (Eleanor Wild)
One of The Rejects (Kayleigh Batchelor)
One of The Rejects (Lyneah Johnson)
Owen (Theo Fraiser Steele) (Series 2-4)
Peggy (Arabella Weir) (series 2)
Prince Otto (Nathan Guy)
Prince Otto's Courtier (Eric Kolelas)
Royal Hunk (Joshua Bowman)
School Friend (Jermaine Lynch)
Shona (Jessica Ashworth)
Sophie's PA (Naomi Heffernan)
