21 Jump Street is a 2012 American action comedy film directed by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller, starring Jonah Hill and Channing Tatum, and scripted by Michael Bacall from a story by him and Hill.
An adaptation of the 1987 television series of the same name by Stephen J. Cannell and Patrick Hasburgh, set within the same continuity as the TV series; the film follows two police officers who are forced to relive high school when they are assigned to go undercover as high school students to prevent the outbreak of a new synthetic drug and arrest its supplier.
It was released theatrically on March 16, 2012, by Columbia Pictures and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, and was both a critical and commercial success. A sequel, titled 22 Jump Street, was released on June 13, 2014. Two further films, MIB 23 (a crossover with the Men in Black franchise) and a female-led spin-off, are currently in development.
In 2005, scholarly student Morton Schmidt (Jonah Hill) and popular underachieving jock Greg Jenko (Channing Tatum) miss their school prom; Schmidt being rejected by the girl he asked to be his date and Jenko being barred from attending because of his grades. Seven years later, the two meet again at the Police Academy and become friends and partners on bicycle patrol. They catch a break when they arrest Domingo (DeRay Davis), the leader of a one-percenter motorcycle gang, but are forced to release him after they failed to read him his Miranda rights.
The two are reassigned to a revived scheme from the 1980s (a meta-reference), which specializes in infiltrating high schools. Captain Dickson (Ice Cube) gives them new identities and enrolls them in a high school as students, giving them class schedules fitting their previous academic performances; Jenko taking mostly arts and humanities and Schmidt taking mostly science classes. Their assignment is to identify and infiltrate the supply chain as well contain the spread of a synthetic drug called HFS (Holy Fucking Shit). After mixing up their identities, Schmidt and Jenko are enrolled in classes ill-fitting to their personalities. Schmidt gets a lead on HFS from classmate Molly (Brie Larson) and he and Jenko meet the school's main dealer, popular student Eric (Dave Franco). The two take HFS in front of him to maintain their cover. After experiencing the drug's effects, the duo discover how much school has changed since they left: Schmidt's intelligence makes him popular while Jenko's lax attitude is frowned upon.
Eric takes a liking to Schmidt, who develops a romantic interest in Molly. Jenko becomes friends with the students in his AP Chemistry class and finds himself becoming more interested in 'geeky' hobbies and academic pursuits. Schmidt and Jenko throw a party at Schmidt's parents' house, where they are living during the course of their undercover assignment, and invite Eric. During the party, a fight breaks out between Schmidt, Jenko, and some party crashers. Schmidt wins the fight after knocking his assailant out by smashing a vase over his head, solidifying his social status and gaining Eric's trust. Jenko's friends hack Eric's phone to enable them to listen in on his conversations. At a party at Eric's house, using the phone hack, Jenko and his friends overhear information about an upcoming meeting between Eric and his supplier, but also catch Schmidt making disparaging comments about Jenko.
The rift between the two grows as their new school life invades upon their official police work. Schmidt and Jenko track Eric to a money exchange with the distributors of HFS – the motorcycle gang from the park – and a chase ensues on the freeway after Schmidt accidentally hits several of the bikers with his vehicle. They return to school, arguing and eventually begin fighting which interrupts the school play. The two are expelled from school and are removed from the Jump Street program.
Eric, stressed and terrified, approaches Schmidt and Jenko retelling the freeway encounter, unaware of their role in it. He recruits them as security for a deal taking place at the school prom. While dressing for the prom they begin to help each other and rekindle their friendship. At the prom, Schmidt finds Molly under the influence of HFS. He reveals his true identity and begs her to leave, predicting a violent apprehension of the drug dealers. Much to their surprise, Schmidt and Jenko discover that the supplier is the physical education teacher, Mr. Walters (Rob Riggle). He tells them that he made the drug accidentally by mixing chemicals stolen from the school chemistry labs with Cool Ranch Doritos and started selling it to the students to supplement his teacher's salary. Having caught Eric smoking marijuana, he was able to persuade him into being his dealer.
The motorcycle gang arrives for the deal but Molly interrupts them and starts arguing with Schmidt and the motorcycle gang leader recognizes Schmidt and Jenko as the cops who had arrested Domingo.Thus, Domingo orders his men to kill Schmidt and Jenko. Two of the gang members reveal themselves as undercover DEA agents Tom Hanson and Doug Penhall (Johnny Depp and Peter DeLuise. In the ensuing gunfight, Hanson and Penhall are fatally wounded. Mr. Walters and Eric escape in a limo with the money and Molly as a hostage; the gang, Schmidt and Jenko follow close behind in their own limo.
As the car chase winds through the city, Jenko creates a homemade bomb using knowledge he garnered from chemistry class and tosses it into the one-percenters' limo, blowing it up. Mr. Walters pulls over and attempts to flee on foot with Molly as his hostage. He shoots at Schmidt but Jenko takes the bullet in his arm, saving his partner's life. In response, Schmidt shoots Mr. Walters, unintentionally severing his penis. The duo successfully read Walters his Miranda rights (in unison). As they arrest both the teacher and Eric, the two cops reconcile their relationship.
The two officers are congratulated and reinstated in Jump Street as Dickson gives them a new assignment: infiltrating a college.
In May 2008, Columbia Pictures confirmed that a film adaptation of the series was under development. Jonah Hill rewrote an existing script by screenwriter Joe Gazzam and executive produced the film, as well as starred in the film. Hill has said he wanted horror director Rob Zombie to direct the picture. In May 2009, Hill described the film adaptation as being a "R-rated, insane, Bad Boys-meets-John Hughes-type movie". On December 21, 2009, it was announced that Columbia Pictures were in talks with Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs directing duo, Phil Lord and Christopher Miller, to direct the film. The film follows the same continuity as the TV series; Lord said, "So, all of those events of the original happened. And now here we are 20 years later, and we’re watching it happen to different people." However, the film features a highly comedic tone, departing radically from the more dramatic and earnest tone of the series.
The film was shot in and around the city of Metairie, Louisiana (suburb of New Orleans), although the filmmakers took elaborate steps to disguise the location as a generic city. They replaced distinctive street signs with signs using a Helvetica typeface, digitally removed billboards from local businesses (except the recognizable local RTA signs toward the end of the film as well as a Zatarain's billboard ad), and avoided filming locations with iconic New Orleans imagery. Despite this, signature landmarks such as the Crescent City Connection and distinctive French Quarter–area street are still partially visible. The main school used as the stand-in for the fictional Sagan High School was Riverdale High School, located in Jefferson, Louisiana. The naked baby pictures of Hill's character used in the film were actual pictures of Hill as a child.
The score for the film was composed by Mark Mothersbaugh. In September 2014, it was released by La-La Land Records on a double disc album, limited to 2,000 copies. The second disc of the album also contains the score from the films sequel, 22 Jump Street, composed by Mothersbaugh as well. A modernized cover of the original television's theme song by Rye Rye (who had a small part in the film) and Esthero was released as a single in the iTunes Store.
In addition, a total of 21 songs were licensed for use in the film. The songs featured in the film include:
The premiere of 21 Jump Street took place on March 12, 2012, at the Paramount Theatre in Austin, TX, during SXSW. The film opened in a wide release in theaters on March 16, 2012.
21 Jump Street received positive reviews, with critics particularly praising the screenplay and Tatum's performance. The film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported an 85% approval rating from critics, based on 210 reviews collected, with an average score of 7.2/10. The consensus states: "A smart, affectionate satire of '80s nostalgia and teen movie tropes, 21 Jump Street offers rowdy mainstream comedy with a surprisingly satisfying bite." Metacritic gives the film a "generally favorable" score of 69 out of 100, based on reviews from 41 critics.
Richard Roeper of The Chicago-Sun Times gave the film a grade of a B+ saying, “I didn't think we needed a 21 Jump Street, but it's actually kind of funny".
The film topped the North American box office with $13.2 million on its opening day. During the weekend, the film grossed $35 million, taking The Lorax out of the #1 spot that it held for its first two weeks.
The film grossed $138,447,667 in North America, and $63,137,661 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $201,585,328; it is also the No. 1 top-grossing movie under the High School Comedy genre.
 The film was listed as the number 6 most illegally downloaded film of 2012 using the BitTorrent protocol with approximately 7.6 million downloads.
21 Jump Street was released on DVD and Blu-ray in Canada and the United States on June 28, 2012 and was released in the United Kingdom on July 9, 2012. Some of the Blu-ray bonus features include 20 deleted scenes and "Johnny Depp on Set" explaining how they brought Johnny Depp to reprise his role as Tom Hanson. It was revealed that Johnny wanted his character to die, but for unknown reasons. In one of the deleted scenes, Tom and his partner, Doug Penhall, were shown to have survived the shootout.
On March 17, 2012, Sony Pictures announced that it was pursuing a sequel to the film, signing a deal that would see Hill and Bacall return to write a script treatment that would be again developed by Bacall. Hill and Tatum returned to star in the film. They were executive producers as well, alongside producer Neal H. Moritz. Phil Lord and Christopher Miller returned to direct this sequel. The film was originally scheduled to be released on June 6, 2014. On May 8, 2013, it was announced that the film would be pushed back a week until June 13, 2014. The film's title was 22 Jump Street. Like the first film, 22 Jump Street received positive reviews.
On September 10, 2014, 23 Jump Street was confirmed. Channing Tatum has yet to sign on to the project. Tatum stated, "I don't know if that joke works three times, so we'll see." On August 7, 2015, it was revealed that Lord and Miller will not direct the film, but instead write and produce. A first draft of the film's script has been completed. In early 2015, a female-driven 21 Jump Street film was rumoured to be in the works alongside the movie. However, with the announcement of the Men in Black crossover and no further updates, the status of the film is unclear.
On December 10, 2014, it was revealed that Sony was planning a crossover between Men in Black and Jump Street. The news was leaked after Sony's system was hacked and then confirmed by the directors of the films, Chris Miller and Phil Lord, during an interview about it. James Bobin was announced as the director in March 2016.
