American Pie is a series of sex comedy films conceived by Adam Herz. The first film in the series was released on July 9, 1999, by Universal Pictures, and became a worldwide pop culture phenomenon, spawning three direct sequels. The second and third films were released at two-year intervals, whereas the fourth film was released in 2012. From 2005 to 2009, four spin-off films were released and the fifth VOD sequel is in pre-production.
Throughout the first film in the original series, Jim Levenstein (Jason Biggs) tries to develop a relationship with his school classmate Nadia (Shannon Elizabeth), and along with his best friends Kevin Myers (Thomas Ian Nicholas), Paul Finch (Eddie Kaye Thomas), and Chris Ostreicher (Chris Klein), attempts to lose his virginity. In the second film, with good friend, and Finch's frenemy Steve Stifler (Seann William Scott), the friends host a summer party and Jim switches his interest to his friend Michelle Flaherty (Alyson Hannigan). In the third film, Jim and Michelle plan to marry, but the forced invitation of Stifler could ruin everything. In the fourth film, the gang gets back together in anticipation for their thirteenth high school reunion. The spin-off series revolves around relatives of Stifler, including his brother Matt (Tad Hilgenbrink) and cousins Erik (John White), Dwight (Steve Talley), Scott (John Patrick Jordan), and their respective friends attempting similar activities.
The original series, produced on a total budget of US$145 million, has grossed $989.5 million worldwide. The spin-off films were released direct-to-video. The original series has received mixed to positive reviews from critics, while the spin-off series has received negative reviews from critics.
In the original American Pie (1999), Jim Levenstein and his friends Kevin Myers, Paul Finch, and Chris Ostreicher attempt to lose their virginity before their high school graduation. Jim pursues Slovakian exchange student Nadia, but his attempts fail after he ejaculates prematurely twice during foreplay, and instead pursues band geek Michelle, asking her to the prom. At Stifler's prom after-party, Jim has a one-night stand with Michelle.
In American Pie 2 (2001), Jim and his friends organize a party at a summer beach house in Grand Harbor reuniting the high school gang. Nadia returns, and Jim asks Michelle to help him finally have sex with her. Jim ends up realizing he is in love with Michelle (whose feelings are mutual), and goes to a recital where she is performing to reveal this to her.
American Wedding (2003) begins with Jim proposing to Michelle. Finch, Kevin, and Stifler help the arranging of his marriage.
In the years that have passed since American Wedding, the most recent installment American Reunion (2012) shows Jim and Michelle married with a child and Kevin has got married himself, whereas Oz and Heather grew apart, Finch still has not found love (not counting Stifler's mom), and Stifler has not come to terms with the fact that his teenage years are long gone. Now these lifelong friends have come home as adults for their thirteenth high school class reunion, to reminisce about – and get inspired by – the hormonal teens they once were.
The film series began with American Pie, released on July 9, 1999. This was followed by three sequels: American Pie 2, released on August 10, 2001, American Wedding, released on August 1, 2003, and American Reunion, released on April 5, 2012.
A fifth theatrical film, under the working title American Pie 5 was announced on August 4, 2012, with Hurwitz and Schlossberg returning as directors and screenwriters. In May 2015, Tara Reid revealed that there have been "talks" about a fifth theatrical movie, possibly set in Las Vegas.
American Pie Presents: Band Camp (2005) follows Stifler's younger brother Matt Stifler (Tad Hilgenbrink), who is forced to attend band camp for the summer and realizes he must change his arrogant ways in order to win over Elyse,
American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile (2006) follows Erik Stifler (John White), the only Stifler to possibly graduate high school a virgin. After a failed attempt at sex with his girlfriend Tracy (Jessy Schram), she gives Erik a free pass to go to the University of Michigan, where his cousin Dwight (Steve Talley) attends, to lose his virginity. In the process, Erik's loyalty is put to the test.
American Pie Presents: Beta House (2007) continues a year after The Naked Mile. Erik has now graduated high school, has lost his girlfriend to her previous boyfriend, and is about to start college. First he must complete a series of tasks before he can join Dwight's fraternity and also begins a new relationship with Ashley (Meghan Heffern), a girl he met in the co-ed bathrooms in their dorm.
American Pie Presents: The Book of Love (2009) takes place ten years after American Pie, and has no connection to any of the prior three spin-off films, except for the appearance of Mr. Levenstein. Set in East Great Falls, a fire in the school's library results in the destruction of the Book of Love (the "Bible" from the first film). With the help of the book's creator, Mr. Levenstein, the people who started the fire set out to restore the book and lose their virginity.
More than six years after the release of the original American Pie, the franchise continued with a direct-to-video spin-off Presents series; consisting of Band Camp, released on December 26, 2005, The Naked Mile, released on December 12, 2006, Beta House, released on December 27, 2007, and The Book of Love, released on December 22, 2009. The first three spin-offs center around relatives of Steve Stifler, which include his brother Matt, and his cousins Erik, Dwight and Scott Stifler.
Several films set in the American Pie continuity were released. The films featured mostly new characters. Aside from the raunchy humor, the common elements among the American Pie Presents films are the continued presence of Jim's Dad and members of the Stifler clan. Other than Jim's Dad, the only other returning characters are Matt Stifler, who takes center stage for the first spin-off, albeit played by a new actor, and Chuck Sherman, who is the guidance counselor for East Great Falls High School in the first spin-off.
Blu-ray
