Jesse Lon Plemons (born April 2, 1988) is an American actor. He is best known for playing Landry Clarke in the NBC drama series Friday Night Lights, Todd Alquist in the AMC crime drama series Breaking Bad, and Ed Blumquist in the second season of the FX anthology series Fargo.
Plemons is also known for his film roles, including Like Mike (2002), Battleship (2012), The Master (2012), and as mobster Kevin Weeks in Black Mass (2015).
Plemons was born in Dallas, Texas, the son of Lisa Beth (née Cason) and Jim Bob Plemons. He was raised in Mart, Texas, a small town outside of Waco, Texas. He has an older sister named Jill Plemons. On his paternal side, he is related to Stephen F. Austin, known as the Father of Texas.
In 2007, Plemons graduated from the Texas Tech University Independent School District, a distance learning program, which allowed him to earn his high school diploma. He attended schools in the Mart, Texas area, where he played football in middle school, junior high, and high school. He attended Mart High School until he received more acting jobs and needed to shift to the online program.
Plemons got his first start in a Coca-Cola commercial when he was 3 1/2 years old. Then when he was 8 years old he started doing extra work, and with the support of his family, spent time auditioning in Los Angeles and landing small jobs.
After appearing in the films Varsity Blues (1999) and All the Pretty Horses (2000), and guest-starring on Walker, Texas Ranger and Sabrina, the Teenage Witch, Plemons' first prominent role was in the film Children on their Birthdays (2002). He later went on to appear in Like Mike (2002) and When Zachary Beaver Came to Town (2003), with guest roles on the television series Judging Amy, The Lyon's Den, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, and Grey's Anatomy between 2003 and 2006.
In 2006, when he was 18 years old, Plemons joined the ensemble cast of NBC's television series Friday Night Lights, detailing the fictional events surrounding a high school football team in Dillon, Texas. In the show's first season, his character Landry Clarke provided comic relief as the best friend of football quarterback Matt Saracen, though Landry himself was not on the team. Among the cast and crew, the joke was that Plemons played football better than most of the other actors, even though his character was one of the few who did not play. Landry joined the Panthers football team in the second season, and Plemons, having played high school football, told director Jeffrey Reiner that he would do his own stunts. In his first football scene, Landry had to "get the crap beat out of [him] over and over and over again". When hit by co-star Taylor Kitsch (playing Tim Riggins) Plemons' chin split open, requiring eleven stitches. The show, a fan and critic favorite, after shifting to DirecTV, ended after five seasons, in 2011.
In 2012, Plemons reunited with Kitsch and Friday Night Lights creator Peter Berg in the film Battleship. Berg, who directed the film, explained that he knew how comfortable Kitsch was with Plemons: "I know that he's really good for Taylor and he makes Taylor better. So, I wrote that whole part for Jesse. I never thought of it as a Friday Night Lights reunion. I thought of it as protection, bringing a trusted family member in."
From 2012 to 2013, Plemons portrayed the villain Todd Alquist during the final season of the AMC drama series Breaking Bad. He was a recurring cast member in Season 5A and was promoted to series regular for Season 5B.
In January 2014, it was reported that Plemons was in strong consideration to be one of the new stars of the upcoming Star Wars Episode VII (Star Wars: The Force Awakens). In March 2014, it was further reported that Plemons, along with four other actors, were being considered for the lead role in Episode VII. The role went to another actor, John Boyega.
Plemons had a starring role in the Boston-set mob film Black Mass, starring Johnny Depp, which opened in theaters in September 2015. Also that year, he appeared in the Stephen Frears film about Lance Armstrong, The Program, and the Steven Spielberg film Bridge of Spies.
Also in the fall of 2015, Plemons co-stars in the second season of the TV show loosely based on the film of the same name, Fargo. He portrays a character named Ed, who is a butcher, and is the husband of Peggy (Kirsten Dunst).
Upcoming projects are the Doug Liman film, Mena (set to be released on January 6, 2017), which stars Tom Cruise, and another film called Other People, wherein he co-stars opposite Molly Shannon.
Plemons resides in Neverland, Texas. From his role on Breaking Bad, he acquired the nickname "Meth Damon", as he both resembled actor Matt Damon and played Damon's character as a boy in the film All The Pretty Horses.
Plemons writes songs, plays guitar, and sings in the band Cowboy and Indian. 
In 2016, Plemons began dating his Fargo co-star Kirsten Dunst.
