Clark Duke (born May 5, 1985) is an American actor known for his roles in the films Kick-Ass, Sex Drive, Hot Tub Time Machine, and A Thousand Words, as well as playing Dale Kettlewell in the TV series Greek, Clark Green in The Office and Barry in Two and a Half Men.
Duke was born in Glenwood, Arkansas, to Angela and Ronnie Duke. He was raised a Baptist.
Along with best friend Michael Cera, Duke created, wrote, directed, and produced the web series Clark and Michael in which he plays a fictional version of himself. The pilot episode was directed by Duke as his college thesis film at Loyola Marymount University.
He was a regular on the television series Greek as Rusty's Christian dorm roommate Dale. Duke appeared in the film Superbad in the small role of 'Party Teenager #1'.
In 1992, he was nominated for a Young Artist Award as an "Outstanding Actor Under Ten in a Television Series" for his work on Hearts Afire. In February 2008, he starred in Volume 2 of the web video series Drunk History with Jack Black, which can be found on YouTube. Michael Cera had appeared in the previous episode, Drunk History, Volume 1.
Duke co-starred in his first major motion picture in 2008 in Sex Drive. He co-starred with Eddie Murphy in A Thousand Words, which was completed in 2008 but remained unreleased until 2012. He appeared in Kick-Ass with Aaron Taylor-Johnson and Nicolas Cage, and played Jacob, the nephew of John Cusack's character Adam, in Hot Tub Time Machine, which was released in March 2010. He made his voice debut in the 2013 animated movie, The Croods, Voicing Thunk.
In 2010, he had a cameo in a Kid Cudi music video, "Erase Me".
He also appeared as Clark in the ninth and final season of the American version of The Office. He reprised his role from Kick-Ass in its sequel Kick-Ass 2, released August 2013.
Duke is an avid wrestling fan, he can be seen in almost every event of Southern California federation Pro Wrestling Guerrilla alongside Max Landis. He also is part of the cast of the second season of WWE Swerved (WWE's Candid Camera).
