Tahj Dayton Mowry (/tɑːʒ ˈmɔːri/; born May 17, 1986) is an American actor, voice actor, dancer, and singer perhaps best known for his role as T.J. Henderson on The WB sitcom, Smart Guy, and as Wade on the animated comedy, Kim Possible on the Disney Channel. Mowry is recently on the hit Freeform comedy series Baby Daddy as Tucker. He is the brother of identical twins Tia Mowry and Tamera Mowry. He is also known for his role on Full House by the name of Teddy; playing the best friend of Michelle.
Tahj Dayton Mowry was born in Honolulu, Hawaii on May 17, 1986. His mother, Darlene Renee Mowry (née Flowers), managed her children's careers. His father, Timothy John Mowry, was in the U.S. Army and later became a custody officer/jailer with the City of Glendale Police Department, when the family moved to California.
His father has English ancestry, and his mother is of Afro-Bahamian descent. His parents met in high school, in Miami, Florida. Both joined the U.S. Army, and both would eventually reach the rank of Sergeant. His older twin sisters are Tia and Tamera Mowry, and he also has a brother, Tavior.
He played varsity football at Westlake High School in Thousand Oaks, California, and one season of football at Savannah State University and the University of Wyoming. He attended Pepperdine University in Malibu, California where his sisters Tia and Tamera both graduated.
Mowry starred and is perhaps best known as T.J. Henderson, a child prodigy, on the sitcom Smart Guy. He played Teddy on the sitcom Full House. He also appeared in Disney Channel movies such as Hounded and The Poof Point. He had a guest role on the Disney Channel Original Series, The Suite Life of Zack & Cody and in a Star Trek: Voyager episode entitled "Innocence". Mowry appeared in the movie Are We Done Yet? as Danny Pulu and in Seventeen Again as Willie Donovan. Mowry also had an appearance in one episode in the fourth season of Desperate Housewives. He also made a guest appearance on an episode of The Game as Melanie Barnett's brother (he's also the real brother of Melanie's portrayer Tia Mowry). Mowry performed the voice of Wade in the Disney Channel animated series Kim Possible.
Mowry sang "Shine Your Light On Me" for School's Out! Christmas, Circle of Life for the Disney Channel Circle of Stars recording of The Lion King which was included on the Platinum Edition DVD and was featured on a single called "Kick It Out" with Boom Boom Satellites and Flo Rida. He also appeared in an episode of Friends when Phoebe sings for kindergarten kids.
He is currently starring as Tucker Dobbs in the ABC Family sitcom Baby Daddy. The half-hour sitcom premiered on June 20, 2012. Mowry released his debut single called "Flirt" produced by Excel Beats in April 2015. He released a six-song EP on August 4, 2015.
