Pepper Ann is an American animated series created by Sue Rose and aired on ABC. It debuted on September 13, 1997, and ended on November 18, 2000. It also aired on Toon Disney until 2005. Pepper Ann was the first animated television series for Disney to be produced in association with Mandeville Films and created by a woman, followed 15 years later by Star vs. the Forces of Evil (created by Daron Nefcy).
Tom Warburton, who later created Cartoon Network's Codename: Kids Next Door, serves as the lead character designer for the series.
Pepper Ann stars adolescents and charts their ups and downs at Hazelnut Middle School. It aired as part of the Disney's One Saturday Morning block. The character originated in a comic strip published in YM magazine.
The show's plots were generally typical of the developing format that has risen out of federal E/I requirements: Pepper Ann is presented with a moral dilemma, chooses the wrong decision, faces the consequences and learns a moral lesson. The series was mostly rated TV-Y. However, the Season 1 finale, "In Support Of", raised controversy. In the episode, Pepper Ann is told she would need "support" to jump on the trampoline. Thinking the teacher meant "breast support", a paranoid, still flat-chested and seemingly unready Pepper Ann is convinced she now needs a bra. When at the trampoline, and asked where her "support" was, Pepper Ann flashes the class (her bra), although she has her back facing the viewer. (The gag is that, by "support", the instructor meant a "support buddy.") That episode was rated TV-Y7.
At the end of the opening sequence, she always finds something different under her desk (similar to The Simpsons' couch gag), such as a mood ring or maracas (also the letter Q in the episode "Vanessa Less Tessa", a glowing green stick in the episode "Hazelnut's Finest", a singing Dieter doll in the episode "Presenting Stewart Waldinger", Mardi Gras beads, and her [Pepper Ann's] remote control in the episode "Radio Freak Hazelnut"). In season one, she always finds "five bucks".
Pepper Ann Pearson (voiced by Kathleen Wilhoite): The 12-year-old protagonist of the series, whose emotions come out in fantasies.
Nicky Anais Little (voiced by Clea Lewis): Pepper Ann's best friend. She is soft spoken and an overachieving violinist. Nicky used to be a bully and skipped Kindergarten when she started school. Nicky eventually became a nice person and switched from First Grade to Kindergarten.
Milo Kamalani (voiced by Danny Cooksey): Other best friend of Pepper Ann, who he calls "P.A." for short. He is a very eccentric and highly dramatic artist.
Lydia Pearson (voiced by April Winchell): Overprotective divorced perky mother of Pepper Ann and Moose.
Margaret Rose "Moose" Pierson (voiced by Pamela Segall): Pepper Ann's tomboyish little sister.
Principal Hickey (voiced by Don Adams): Hazelnut Middle School's tough disciplinarian with zero tolerance for Pepper Ann's shenanigans.
Janie Lilly Diggety (voiced by Susan Tolsky): Pepper Ann and Moose's aunt, who served as a Green Beret.
Jo Jo Diggety (voiced by Tino Insana): Pepper Ann and Moose's uncle, who works as a cop.
Trinket St. Blair (voiced by Jenna von Oÿ): A popular rich and spoiled girl who is mean to Pepper Ann.
Dieter Lederhosen (voiced by Jeff Bennett): The German exchange student.
Cissy Rooney (voiced by Kath Soucie): A popular girl who is Trinket's friend.
Tessa & Vanessa James (voiced by Cree Summer): The twin school gossips.
Craig Bean (voiced by Jeff Bennett): The cool 8th grader, and Pepper Ann's love interest.
Sherie Spleen (voiced by April Winchell): Anchor Woman News
Ms. Stark (voiced by April Winchell)
Ms. Little (voiced by Kath Soucie)
Mr. Carter (voiced by Jim Cummings)
Grandmother Lilly (voiced by April Winchell)
Milicent the Militant (voiced by April Winchell)
Coach Doogan (voiced by Kathy Najimy)
Margot LaSandre (voiced by Kathy Najimy)
Ms. Bronte Bladdar (voiced by Bebe Neuwirth)
Ms. Carlotta Sneed (voiced by Julia Sweeney)
Sketch (voiced by Karen Duffy)
Tank The 8th Grader (voiced by Brittany Murphy)
Supermodel Mindy (voiced by Kath Soucie)
Mr. Little (voiced by Jim Cummings)
Vera (voiced by Paddi Edwards)
Shelf McLain (voiced by Jeff Bennett)
Gina & Tina (voiced by Kath Soucie)
Mrs. Lederhosen (voiced by Jeff Bennett)
Stewart Walldinger (voiced by Cam Clarke)
Gwen Mezzrow (voiced by Kimmy Robertson)
Leo Lilly (voiced by Maurice LaMarche)
Chuck Pearson (voiced by Maurice LaMarche)
Mr. Sherman Finky (voiced by Don Lake)
Mr. Clapper (voiced by James Avery)
Nurse Oomla (voiced by Ellen Cleghorne)
Wayne MacCarbe (voiced by Wallace Langham)
Alice Kane (voiced by Lauren Tom)
Lamar Abu Dahbi (voiced by Kenny Blank)
Nedward Diggerty (voiced by Jeff Bennett)
Brenda (voiced by Tara Charendoff)
Poison (voiced by Meridith Scott Lynn)
Amber O'Malley (voiced by Jodi Benson)
Damian (voiced by Ryan O'Donohue)
Damiana (voiced by Francesca Marie Smith)
Uncle Harry (voiced by Maurice LaMarche)
Frankie (voiced by Maurice LaMarche)
Aunt Fanny (voiced by Julia Duffy)
Bernice (voiced by Isabel Sanford)
Andy (voiced by Gregg Rainwater)
Bob (voiced by Gregg Rainwater)
Stuart (voiced by Cam Clarke)
Coach Bronson (voiced by Thomas F. Wilson)
Pepper Ann and Lydia make a cameo appearance in the House of Mouse episode, "The Stolen Cartoons". They are the only Walt Disney Television Animation characters ever to appear on House of Mouse, which otherwise only used characters from Disney's features and classic shorts (and sometimes comics). Lydia says "Don't touch the villain, dear," to Pepper Ann after Pete falls out of the sky after being kicked out of the club.
