Drugstore Cowboy is a 1989 American crime drama film directed by Gus Van Sant, written by Van Sant and Daniel Yost, and is based on an autobiographical novel by James Fogle. The film stars Matt Dillon in the title role, Kelly Lynch, Heather Graham and William S. Burroughs. It marked Van Sant's second film as director.
At the time the film was made, the source novel by Fogle was unpublished. It was later published in 1990, by which time Fogle had been released from prison. Fogle, like the characters in his story, was a long-time drug user and dealer.
The story follows Robert "Bob" Hughes (Matt Dillon) and his crew of drug addicts as they travel across the U.S. Pacific Northwest in 1971, supporting their habit by robbing pharmacies and hospitals. After a tragedy strikes the group, Bob decides to try to "go straight", but finds that there is more to extricating himself from the drug user's lifestyle than just giving up drugs.
Matt Dillon as Robert "Bob" Hughes
Kelly Lynch as Dianne
James LeGros as Rick
Heather Graham as Nadine
Max Perlich as David
James Remar as Gentry
Grace Zabriskie as Mrs. Hughes
William S. Burroughs as Tom
Drugstore Cowboy was filmed mainly around Portland, Oregon, including in an area in the Pearl District that used to be a railyard, with a viaduct going over it. The Lovejoy Columns, which formerly held up the viaduct and feature outsider artwork, are featured in the movie.
The soundtrack includes songs that are contemporaneous with the film's setting, along with original music by Elliot Goldenthal. It is one of his earliest works; in it he does not use an orchestra but a whole range of instruments treated in a synthesizer. The score and soundtrack were also the first that Goldenthal worked on with Richard Martinez, a music producer whose "computer expertise and sound production assistance" became the basis for frequent subsequent collaborations. AllMusic rated this soundtrack three stars out of five.
The film was very well received critically, being listed on the Top Ten list of both Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert for films released in 1989. It holds a rare 100% rating at Rotten Tomatoes, with an average score of 8/10 based on 27 reviews. Review aggregator Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 82 based on 15 reviews indicating "Universal Acclaim".
Drugstore Cowboy won the following awards:
L.A. Film Critics Association (1988) — Best Screenplay (Dan Yost, Gus Van Sant)
National Society of Film Critics (1988) — Best Film, Best Director
Independent Spirit Award (1989) — Best Actor (Matt Dillon), Best Cinematography, Best Screenplay, Best Supporting Actor (Max Perlich)
New York Film Critics Circle (1989) — Best Screenplay
