Clear and Present Danger is a 1994 American spy thriller film directed by Phillip Noyce and based on Tom Clancy's novel of the same name. It was preceded by the 1990 film The Hunt for Red October and the 1992 film Patriot Games, all three featuring Clancy's character Jack Ryan. It is the last film version of Clancy's novels to feature Harrison Ford as Ryan and James Earl Jones as Vice Admiral James Greer, as well as the final one directed by Noyce.
As in the novel, Ryan is appointed U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Acting Deputy Director, and discovers he is being kept in the dark by colleagues who are conducting a covert war against drug lords in Colombia, apparently with the approval of the President of the United States. The film premiered in theaters in the United States on August 3, 1994, and was a major financial success, earning over $200 million at the box office.
A U.S. Coast Guard patrol boat stops a suspicious yacht, discovering that an American businessman and his family have been murdered by several men operating the craft. The murdered man happens to have been a close friend of the President. President Bennett learns that the man was murdered because of his ties to a drug cartel, having skimmed over $650 million from it. The President tells James Cutter, his National Security Advisor, that Colombian drug cartels represent a "clear and present danger" to the U.S., indirectly giving him unofficial permission to kill the men responsible for his friend's murder. When Vice Admiral Jim Greer is stricken with terminal cancer, Jack Ryan is appointed Deputy Director for Intelligence and is asked to go before the U.S. Congress to request increased funding for ongoing CIA operations in Colombia.
Seeking to keep Ryan out of the loop, Cutter turns to the CIA's Deputy Director for Operations Bob Ritter, who secures a document giving him permission to act as he sees fit to take down the cartel. Ritter assembles a black-operations team with the help of John Clark. The team inserts itself in Colombia, with Clark running the logistics, and Captain Ricardo Ramirez leading a ground force in search-and-destroy missions against various drug cartels.
The head of one of the drug gangs, Ernesto Escobedo, is enraged at having lost over $650 million as a result of the freezing of assets, and has his intelligence officer, Félix Cortez, try to retrieve the funds. Through a contact, Cortez discovers FBI Director Emil Jacobs is visiting Colombia to negotiate with Colombia's attorney general concerning the frozen money. Cortez has Jacobs ambushed and killed, engineering it so that suspicion will fall on Escobedo.
Cortez brokers a deal with Cutter. Cortez will assassinate Escobedo and take over the cartel, then reduce drug shipments to the U.S. and allow American law enforcement to arrest some of his workers at regular intervals to make it appear as if the U.S. is winning the drug war. In exchange, Cutter will shut down all operations in Colombia and allow Cortez to subdue Clark's soldiers. Cutter agrees and orders Ritter to get rid of all evidence of their operations and cut off the troops in Colombia from all support. Ryan is told about the meeting between Cutter and Cortez. He hacks Ritter's computer and discovers the conspiracy unfolding in Colombia.
The black-ops team is ambushed in Colombia, as Ryan arrives and finds Clark, offering assistance. They fly to where the soldiers were attacked and find the squad's sniper, Domingo Chavez, who tells them two of his unit members have been captured and the rest are dead. Ryan visits Escobedo's mansion and tells him what Cortez has been doing. Enraged, Escobedo accuses Cortez of treachery. One of Cortez's men kills Escobedo and his henchmen, but is shot by Chávez. Ryan, Clark and Chávez rescue the prisoners, kill Cortez, and escape.
Ryan confronts the President and tells him he intends to inform the Congressional Oversight Committee about the conspiracy despite the damage it could do to his career. He walks out of the Oval Office and begins his testimony to Congress.
Harrison Ford as Jack Ryan
Willem Dafoe as John Clark, known as callsign "Variable" in the film
Joaquim de Almeida as Col. Félix Cortez
Miguel Sandoval as Ernesto Escobedo, leader of the Cali cartel
Henry Czerny as Bob Ritter, CIA Deputy Director for Operations
Harris Yulin as James Cutter, National Security Advisor
Donald Moffat as President Bennett
Benjamin Bratt as Captain Ramírez
Raymond Cruz as Domingo Chavez
James Earl Jones as Vice Admiral Jim Greer, CIA Deputy Director for Intelligence
Tom Tammi as Emile Jacobs, Director of the FBI
Tim Grimm as FBI agent Dan Murray
Anne Archer as Dr Caroline "Cathy" Ryan
Ann Magnuson as Moira Wolfson, Assistant to the Director of the FBI
Belita Moreno as Senior Special Agent Jean Fowler, DEA Task Force Commander
Jaime Gómez as Sgt. Julio Vega
Dean Jones as Judge Moore
Greg Germann as Petey
Thora Birch as Sally Ryan
Ellen Geer as Rose
Hope Lange as U.S. Senator Mayo
Tom Bower as Clark's helicopter pilot (uncredited)
John Milius says he wrote the first draft and later wrote the sequence where Jack Ryan is ambushed in SUVs. He says the original ending had Cortez come to Washington to kill the national security adviser, only to then be killed in a mugging by drug addicts.
The film's musical score was composed by James Horner. Milan Records released an album featuring selections from the score on August 2, 1994.
An expanded two-disc collector's edition was released in 2013 by specialty label Intrada Records. The new version now includes the complete score by Horner, remixed from the original scoring master tapes with cues appearing in the same order as they appear in the film.
The film received positive reviews from critics; it holds a 82% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 39 critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average out of 100 to critics' reviews, Clear and Present Danger received a score of 74 based on 14 reviews.
Mick LaSalle, writing for the San Francisco Chronicle, commented how it "delights in an almost boyish way in the trappings of power: rocket launchers and high-tech missiles, flags, ceremony and political double-speak." James Berardinelli, who wrote for ReelViews, remarked, "Clear and Present Danger is all plot and no characters. The people running around on screen have about as much depth as the sheen of sweat on Harrison Ford's forehead. Jack Ryan is the most disappointing of all. He's disgustingly virtuous: a flawless fighter for good and justice, a Superman without the cape. I spent half the movie wondering if this guy was ever going to show anything to mark him as vaguely human." In Reel Power: Hollywood Cinema and American Supremacy, author Matthew Alford formulated a critique of the film, pointing out that supporting characters like Cutter and Ritter are pointedly squeamish about the use of force. He queried, "Where is this abundance of sensitivity from the US national security apparatus towards the people of Latin America in the real world?". He concluded, "The answers are all too obvious, except to a Hollywood hooked on schmaltz, willfully ignorant of reality and in thrall to power."
Clear and Present Danger opened strongly at the U.S. box office, grossing $20,348,017 in its first weekend and holding the top spot for two weeks. It eventually went on to gross an estimated $122,187,717 in the U.S., and $93,700,000 in foreign revenue for a worldwide total of $215,887,717.
The film was nominated for the Academy Awards for Best Sound Mixing (Donald O. Mitchell, Michael Herbick, Frank A. Montaño, and Art Rochester) and Best Sound Editing (John Leveque and Bruce Stambler).
1994 in film
Illegal drug trade in Colombia
