Mark Ross Pellegrino (born April 9, 1965) is an American actor of film and television. A highly prolific actor, he is best known for his work as Lucifer in Supernatural, Paul Bennett in Dexter, Jacob in Lost and as Bishop in Being Human. He also starred as Jedikiah Price in The CW series The Tomorrow People and as Clayton Haas in the ABC thriller Quantico.
Pellegrino appeared in season 7, episode 3 of "The X-Files" in November 1999. In 2001, he played an incompetent hitman in David Lynch's critically acclaimed "Mulholland Drive". Pellegrino starred as Rita's abusive ex-con former husband Paul on Showtime's Dexter; and later as Lucifer on Supernatural and as the mysterious near-immortal Jacob on ABC's Lost. He has appeared on the television series Northern Exposure, ER, Without a Trace, NYPD Blue, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, and Knight Rider. He also is well known as the "Blond Thug" who stuffs The Dude's head down the toilet and drops his bowling ball, breaking the floor tile, in the cult film The Big Lebowski. He also is featured in "National Treasure" as the background FBI agent known as Agent Johnson. In 2005, Pellegino appeared in the Academy Award winning film Capote, playing murderer Dick Hickock.
In March 2009, Pellegrino was cast on the ABC series Lost for an appearance in the final episode of Season 5, to play the role of the mysterious Jacob. Although the press release for the episode refers to his character simply as "Man No. 1", the episode revealed that Pellegrino portrayed Jacob, a mysterious character pivotal to the show's plot. On June 26, 2009 it was also announced that Pellegrino was cast in a recurring role as Lucifer in the fifth season of the CW series Supernatural until he was returned to his prison, returning in the seventh season as a hallucination of protagonist Sam Winchester due to his mental damage after he spent a year in the Cage, until Sam was cured of his insanity.
He portrayed the vampire "Bishop" in the SyFy horror series Being Human in the first season, and also reprises the role in season 2 and 3 as both flashbacks and hallucinations.
He starred as Jedikiah Price in The CW series The Tomorrow People.
In 2015, Pellegrino joined the ABC thriller series Quantico playing the recurring role of FBI Deputy Director Clayton Haas.
Pellegrino was born in Los Angeles, California. He is an adherent of Objectivism, a philosophy created by Russian-American writer Ayn Rand. Pellegrino does not identify as a libertarian. Though he considers this description to be the closest to his political views, he considers Libertarianism to be an anarchist political ideology and has distanced himself from this ideology, describing himself solely as an Objectivist, stating that he sees a place for government in society. He has described his political views, instead, as classical liberalism, and has also described himself as a radical capitalist. He is married to Tracy Aziz and stepfather of her daughter Tess.
Pellegrino is an atheist.
