Lemonade Mouth is a 2011 musical drama film based on the novel of the same name by Mark Peter Hughes. The film was directed by Patricia Riggen and written by April Blair, and stars Bridgit Mendler, Adam Hicks, Hayley Kiyoko, Naomi Scott and Blake Michael. The Disney Channel Original Movie tells the story of five high school students who meet in detention and form a band to stand up for their beliefs and to overcome their individual and collective struggles. It premiered on April 15, 2011 on the Disney Channel. It has been met with generally positive reviews, with some praising it for its many positive themes of honesty, integrity, and self-expression, and for its emphasis on the importance of the arts and of family and friendship. Other reviews have described it as a "typically innocuous Disney channel flick." The soundtrack was released on April 12, 2011.
Five high school juniors: Olivia White (Bridgit Mendler), Mohini "Mo" Banjaree (Naomi Scott), Charles "Charlie" Delgado (Blake Michael), Stella Yamada (Hayley Kiyoko), and Wendell "Wen" Gifford (Adam Hicks) all meet after ending up in detention for different reasons. While there, they tap out a beat and play instruments, and Olivia sings "Turn Up the Music". Miss Reznick (Tisha Campbell-Martin), the music teacher, said that they would make a great band. She also mentions a music show "Rising Star". Mudslide Crush, a popular band were also entering so they passed as they wouldn't have a shot.
The next day, the group eats at their local pizzeria and they talked about Miss Reznick's words. The band forms with Olivia as lead vocalist, Stella as lead guitarist, Mo as bass guitarist, Wen as keyboardist, and Charlie as drummer, but they are unable to choose a band name. At school, Olivia gets cornered by Ray Beech (Chris Brochu), lead singer of a rival band, Mudslide Crush, who begins questioning and bullying her. The rest of the band intervenes and Stella spits lemonade onto Ray. Ray refers to Stella as "lemonade mouth" and Olivia, the narrator, states: "And that is how we got our band name."
The band is later shocked to see that the unique lemonade machine, "Mel's Organic Lemonade", is scheduled for removal. The school principal, Stanley Brenigan (Christopher McDonald) moved all extracurricular activities to the school basement to make room for a new gymnasium. When Mo sees her boyfriend, Scott Picket (Nick Roux), the guitarist of Mudslide Crush, heavily flirting with another girl, she is devastated and leaves him. Meanwhile, Olivia and Wen meet to work on a song together and bond. At the Halloween bash, Lemonade Mouth performs "Determinate." After the performance, Stella makes a speech opposing Brenigan's decisions and encouraging self-expression to the supportive crowd. Angered, Principal Brenigan shuts them down and calls them to his office the next day. He compliments their talent as a band, but forbids them from playing at school again. The next day, the band sees posters and banners all around the school supporting Lemonade Mouth, which raises their spirits. They also discover that "Determinate" is playing on the local radio. Shortly after, however, things go downhill: Mo gets sick, Charlie breaks his fingers when he angrily closes the cabinet where he keeps his drumsticks, Wen injures his eye when he loses control of a picture frame after he becomes shocked at the news of his father when he asked him to be his best man in his marriage, and Olivia loses her voice after arguing with Wen for complaining about his father's girlfriend.
Stella calls the band to the school, where she is protesting the removal of the lemonade machine. The group gets into a heated argument with one another and fight with the men removing the lemonade machine. Police arrive and they are brought to a holding cell to wait for their parents. After contemplating giving up, the band agrees to stick together and perform at Rising Star (an upcoming "battle of the bands" where the winner wins a record deal), even though they realize that they will not win the competition.
At Rising Star, Mudslide Crush performs "Don't Ya Wish U Were Us". Lemonade Mouth takes the stage and tries to perform "Determinate," but only Stella is able to play, due to their injuries. Discouraged, they start to leave. The audience then begins to sing "Determinate" together in support of the band. Fed up with Ray, Scott leaves Mudslide Crush and plays with Stella, joining Lemonade Mouth as they stand together in tears, watching the audience sing for them. In narration, Olivia reveals that although they did not win the competition, they won something bigger that night. Things start patching up again for the band: Mo and Scott get back together; Charlie, who had previously liked Mo, accepts this and decides to aim his attention at a girl who likes him; Stella and her mother become close again, and Wen accepts his new stepmother.
At Wen's father's wedding, the man sitting next to Stella tells her that he was in a band himself and now runs an organic lemonade company that has recently become very successful. Stella recognizes him as Mel, and he agrees to donate a music hall for Ms. Reznik and everything works out after all. Mr Brenigan confesses to Ms Reznik that he was once a rebellious teen like Stella, and the two adults become flirtatious. Olivia mails the entire story to her father, whom she has not seen in years because he is in prison. The standard edition of the film closes with Lemonade Mouth performing "Breakthrough" at Madison Square Garden, with Scott as their new additional guitarist. The extended edition includes an interview with Moxie Morris on "All Things Musical", in which Mo and Scott's relationship is nearly exposed by Moxie in front of Mo's father, but they are saved by Olivia, who announces that she and Wen are the ones dating. Afterwards, the band performs "Livin On A High Wire".
Bridgit Mendler as Olivia White, the lead singer of the band. She was a shy girl without any friends but eventually made friends with everyone in the band.
Adam Hicks as Wendell "Wen" Gifford, the pianist and also a rapper of the band
Hayley Kiyoko as Stella Yamada. Stella was seen as a weird girl by everyone at first. She was the person who brought the band together. 
Naomi Scott as Mohini "Mo" Banjaree, an Indian girl who was afraid of her dad. She's the bassist of the band.
Blake Michael as Charles "Charlie" Delgado. Charlie has an older brother that everyone thought is perfect. Charlie had to play soccer because of that, but he got into detention and met the bandmates. He's the drummer of the band.
Nick Roux as Scott Pickett, Mo's boyfriend
Chris Brochu as Ray Beech, a jerk who always pick a fight with Lemonade Mouth members
Tisha Campbell-Martin as Miss Jenny Reznick
Christopher McDonald as Principal Stanley Brenigan. He was against Lemonade Mouth thought it was best for the school, but he came to it at the end
Scott Takeda as Mr. Yamada
Ariana Smythe as Sydney
Judith Rane as Brenda
Isaac Kappy as Mel
Ryan Montano as Tommy Delgado
Lauren Poole as Moxie Morris
Bob Jesser as Mr. Gifford
Leedy Corbin as Georgie Gifford
Lance Capaldi as Ticket Taker
Shishir Kurup as Mr. Banjaree. He wanted Mo to be this perfect Indian daughter, but he tried to let Mo be Mo at the end.
Author Mark Peter Hughes has a cameo appearance as an extra, dressed as a bee at the Halloween Bash.
The movie was filmed in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The names of eight characters in the book were changed for the film: the character of "Olivia Whitehead" was shortened to "Olivia White", "Wendel Gifford" changed by one letter to "Wendell Gifford", "Stella Penn" changed to "Stella Yamada", "Mohini Banerjee" changed to "Mohini Banjaree", and "Charlie Hirsh" changed to "Charlie Delgado". Casting was announced in August 2010.
In the film, Brenigan was the Principal, but in the book, he was the Vice-Principal.
In the book, Wen plays the trumpet and Charlie plays the drums, congas, timbales, and bongos, but in the film, Wen plays keyboard and Charlie plays drums.
The last names of the main characters are also changed, Olivia Whitehead to Olivia White, Wendel Gifford to Wendell Gifford, Stella Penn to Stella Yamada, Mohini Banerjee to Mohini Banjaree, and Charlie Hirsh to Charlie Delgado.
In the book, Olivia's mom left her and her father, but in the movie, Olivia's mom died.
In the book, Mo gets in trouble for making out with Scott, but in the movie, she gets in trouble for skipping class.
In the book, Stella shaved her head and dyed her hair green, while in the film, her hair is brown and blonde.
In the movie, Wen gets in trouble for calling his teacher stupid, but in the book, he gets in trouble for swearing.
In the book, Mo gets over Scott and ends up dating Charlie, but in the movie, Mo decides to give Scott another chance while Charlie starts dating one of his fans.
In the book, the lemonade they drink is frozen, while the lemonade in the film is liquid.
The encounter with Mel doesn't happen in the book.
In the book, the band visits Olivia's father in prison.
In the book, Stella played the ukulele, but in the film, Stella plays the guitar.
In the book, Stella's shirt had handprints over her breasts, but in the film, her shirt said, "Question Authority."
In the book, Wen had a brother named George, but in the film, he has a sister named Georgie.
In the book, the band stares at clouds from Olivia's rooftop, but in the film, they stare at them from her backyard.
In the book, Olivia is described as overweight and showing no emotion most of the time, but in the film, she's skinny and easily gets visibly nervous.
In the book, Scott finds out about Mo being in Lemonade Mouth at a warehouse, but in the film, he finds out at the beach.
In the film, Sydney is 28, but in the book, she's 26.
In the book, Sydney draws nude photos, but in the film, she's a photographer.
In the book, Sydney had black hair, while in the film, she had brown hair.
In the book, Stella has a stepdad, an older sister, and twin half-brothers.
In the book, Charlie had a stillborn twin brother named Aaron, causing him to wonder why he was born instead of him, but in the film, Charlie finds himself in the shadow of his older brother, Tommy.
The book takes place in Rhode Island, while the film takes place in New Mexico.
In the book, Wen had 2 best friends before he met the other band members, but when he asked one of them out, the 3 of them no longer were friends.
In the book, Wen is attracted to Sydney, but in the film, he doesn't like her and thinks she's trying to replace his mom.
In the book, Stella has dyslexia and ADHD.
In the book, Mo breaks up with Scott after she sees him making out with his ex-girlfriend, but in the film, she breaks up with him after she sees him flirt with another girl.
Family-oriented reviewers at Common Sense Media praised the film for its themes of honesty, empowerment, overcoming adversity, self-expression, standing up for what one believes in, and for its emphasis on the importance of the arts and of friendship and family. Other reviews were not so kind, with some critics claiming that Lemonade Mouth is a "typically innocuous Disney Channel flick" that is a "hopelessly dumbed-down endeavor." The film holds an 6.7 rating, making "Fair" (based on 17 votes) on TV.com.
Lemonade Mouth was watched by 5.7 million viewers on its premiere night. ranking as the No. 1 TV Telecast among Kids 7–11 (2.3 million/9.4 rating) and Teens (2.1 million/8.5 rating), and cable's No. 1 original movie of 2011 among Total Viewers. With DVR viewing included, its total was 7.1 million viewers.
The movie features ten original songs written by Aris Archontis, Maria Christensen, Ali Dee, Andy Dodd, Tom Leonard, Jeannie Lurie, Niclas Molinder, Chen Neeman, Joacim Persson, Lindy Robbins, Shridhar Solanki, Shane Stevens, Matthew Tishler, Bryan Todd, Reed Vertelney, Adam Watts, and Adam Hicks. Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack on April 12, 2011.
In 2011, the author of Lemonade Mouth said that he has been working on a sequel. Also, Blake Michael has said: "It's all up to the fans, it's in their hands. If people enjoy it and they love it and they want more, they'll get it. I think Disney is just a great organization in general and they're always one step ahead of the game. So you never really know what's gonna happen." On June 15, 2011, it was announced during the 2011 Licensing International Expo that Lemonade Mouth 2 is in the works.
On April 6, 2012, Chris Brochu announced on his Twitter account, that the sequel was no longer going into production. In interviews with Kidzworld Media and BSCKids in May 2012, Bridgit Mendler also confirmed that a sequel would not be produced, noting that "they (Disney) tried to figure something out for a sequel, but everyone at Disney felt like the movie had completed its story in the first movie."
A local premiere was held in the author Mark Peter Hughes's town of Wayland, Massachusetts. It was broadcast live by the town public access station, WayCAM.TV, by local students. The premiere broadcast was directed and produced by technical student Jonah Camiel.
The cast from the film have performed on The View, Good Morning America, So Random! and UK's Daybreak.
