Roustabout is a 1964 American musical feature film starring Elvis Presley as a singer who takes a job working with a struggling carnival. The film was produced by Hal Wallis and directed by John Rich from a screenplay by Anthony Lawrence and Allan Weiss. The screenplay was nominated for a Writers Guild of America award for best written American musical although Roustabout received a lukewarm review in Variety. The film's soundtrack album was one of Elvis Presley's most successful, reaching no. 1 on the Billboard Album Chart.
Musician Charlie Rogers (Elvis Presley) is fired from a gig at a teahouse run by Lou (Jack Albertson) after brawling with several college students in the parking lot. After a night in jail, Charlie hits the road on his Honda 305 Superhawk motorcycle. He spots Cathy Lean (Joan Freeman) driving with her father Joe (Leif Erickson) and their employer, Maggie Morgan (Barbara Stanwyck). When Charlie tries to become friendly with Cathy, Joe forces him off the road and the bike is wrecked after crashing into a wooden fence.
Maggie offers him a place to stay and a job with her struggling traveling carnival while the bike is being repaired. Charlie becomes a "carnie", a roustabout. Maggie recognizes his musical talents and promotes him to feature attraction. His act soon draws large crowds. Off stage, Charlie romances Cathy, which creates animosity with Joe. After the two men repeatedly clash and Charlie is accused of holding back a customer's lost wallet that Joe was accused of stealing, Charlie leaves to star in the much better financed show of rival carnival producer Harry Carver (Pat Buttram).
Once again, he is a great success. However, when Charlie learns that Maggie is facing bankruptcy, he returns to her carnival. In the musical finale, he is happily reunited with Cathy.
Elvis Presley as Charlie Rogers
Barbara Stanwyck as Maggie Morgan
Joan Freeman as Cathy Lean
Leif Erickson as Joe Lean
Jack Albertson as Lou, a teahouse manager
Sue Ane Langdon as Madame Mijanou, a fortune teller
Pat Buttram as Harry Carver
Joan Staley as Marge
Dabbs Greer as Arthur Nielsen
Steve Brodie as Fred the Pitcher
Norman Grabowski as Sam
Lynn Borden as a college student
Jane Dulo as Hazel
Joel Fluellen as Cody Marsh, another roustabout
Wilda Taylor as Little Egypt, the principal dancer in the number "Little Egypt"
Uncredited actors listed alphabetically:
Beverly Adams as Cora, a dancer
Billy Barty as Billy, carnival midget
Teri Garr as College Girl. Garr can also be seen as a backup dancer during several musical numbers.
Joy Harmon as College Girl
Richard Kiel as Strongman. Kiel is better known for playing "Jaws" in the James Bond movies The Spy Who Loved Me (1977) and Moonraker (1979)
Kent McCord as Carnival Worker
Raquel Welch as College Girl
Red West as Carnival Worker
See also Roustabout (album)
"Roustabout" by Bill Giant, Bernie Baum and Florence Kaye
"Poison Ivy League" by Bill Giant, Bernie Baum and Florence Kaye
"One Track Heart" by Bill Giant, Bernie Baum and Florence Kaye
"Wheels On My Heels" by Sid Tepper and Roy C. Bennett
"It's a Wonderful World" by Sid Tepper and Roy C. Bennett
"It's Carnival Time" by Ben Weisman and Sid Wayne
"Carny Town" by Fred Wise and Randy Starr
"Hard Knocks" by Joy Byers
"There's a Brand New Day On the Horizon" by Joy Byers
"Big Love, Big Heartache" by Dolores Fuller, Lee Morris and Sonny Hendrix
"Little Egypt" by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller
"I'm A Roustabout" by Otis Blackwell and Winfield Scott, a different and unreleased theme song for the movie
All tunes in the film were sung by Presley.
Roustabout reached #8 nationally at the box office in 1964 based on the Variety survey. The film finished as #28 on the year-end list of the top-grossing movies of 1964 and earned $3 million at the box office.
While the New York Times declined to review the film, Variety was lukewarn, faulting mainly the script, but noted the film would likely be a box-office hit based upon its star names, songs, and Technicolor, Techniscope qualities.
The film's screenwriters, Anthony Lawrence and Allan Weiss, were nominated for the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written American Musical. The film generated a best-selling soundtrack album that went #1 on the Billboard charts. The soundtrack album would be Presley's final #1 soundtrack and last #1 album until 1969's From Elvis in Memphis, which topped the charts in the U.K.
List of American films of 1964
