Devdas is a 2002 Indian romantic drama film directed by Sanjay Leela Bhansali and based on the 1917 Sharat Chandra Chattopadhyay's novel Devdas. This is the third Hindi version and the first film version of the story in Hindi done in colour. The film follows Devdas (Shah Rukh Khan), a wealthy law graduate in the early 1900s, who returns from his studies in London to marry his childhood sweetheart, Paro (Aishwarya Rai). However, the rejection of this marriage by his own family sparks his descent into alcohol, ultimately leading to his emotional deterioration. The film was screened retrospective, during the 2014 International Film Festival of India in the Celebrating Dance in Indian cinema section. Devdas was declared a hit in India by Box Office India and won the Filmfare Award for Best Film. The film also won five National Awards and a further nine Filmfare Awards, tied with Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge with the most Filmfare Awards any film had won at the time (later beaten in 2005 by Bhansali's Black).
It was received well by western audiences alike and was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Language Film and was also India's submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. It was ranked #74 in Empire magazines "The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema" in 2010. Time Magazine named Devdas as the best movie of 2002 among all the movies released around the world that year. The film was recently included in Time Magazine's top 10 movies of the millennium worldwide.
The acting was seen by many as the primary factor for the film's success, with Shah Rukh Khan, Aishwarya Rai and Madhuri Dixit all winning Filmfare Awards for their performances. The film's success was also attributed to the dance performances, with Dixit's "Maar Daala" considered one of the most iconic of her career and the song "Dola Re Dola" becoming a hit due to the unique dance duet between Aishwarya Rai and Madhuri Dixit, two of the leading actresses of the epoch. At the time of its release, Devdas was the most expensive Bollywood film ever produced, with a reported budget of ₹50 crore (US$7.4 million). The film was a major commercial success in India and abroad, becoming the highest grossing Indian film of the year.
In the early 1900s, Kaushalya (Smita Jaykar) hears that her younger son, Devdas (Shah Rukh Khan), is about to return home after leaving 10 years ago for law school in England. Kaushalya tells her neighbor Sumitra (Kirron Kher), who is overjoyed.
Sumitra's daughter, Parvati "Paro" Chakraborty (Aishwarya Rai) and Devdas share a deep friendship rooted in childhood. When Devdas was sent to England, Paro had lit an oil lamp to prompt his return and never allowed it to extinguish.
When Devdas returns, the childhood friendship between him and Paro turns to love. Everyone believes that Devdas and Paro will get married, but Devdas' scheming sister-in-law Kumud (Ananya Khare) reminds Kaushalya of Paro's maternal lineage of nautch girls and nautanki performers, which is inappropriate for the Mukherjee family. Sumitra publicly announces her desire for Devdas and Paro to marry, and Kaushalya rejects and humiliates her in public by saying that she is from a lower class. Devastated, Sumitra hastily arranges Paro's marriage to a man from a family wealthier than the Mukherjees: Thakur Bhuvan Chaudhry (Vijayendra Ghatge), a forty-year-old widower aristocrat with three grown children.
When Devdas' father also rejects Paro, Devdas leaves his parents' house and takes refuge at a brothel. He leaves a letter for Paro, falsely stating that love had never existed between them. At the brothel, he meets a good-hearted tawaif (courtesan) named Chandramukhi (Madhuri Dixit), who falls in love with him. Soon, Devdas realizes his mistake in abandoning Paro. He returns to her during her wedding and asks her to elope but Paro refuses, reminding him of the way he had discarded her so easily.
Paro learns from her new husband that he has married her only to be mother to his children and lady of the estate, but that his love is only for his late first wife. She dutifully fulfills her responsibilities, while Devdas, heartbroken at having lost Paro, permanently moves to Chandramukhi's brothel and becomes an alcoholic. When Devdas' father is on his deathbed, he asks to see his son Devdas, but Devdas arrives later, at his father's funeral—shamefully and obviously drunk. He causes a scene and eventually passes out.
Eventually, Devdas becomes so ill that the slightest dose of alcohol could kill him. He returns to the family home to heal, and discovers that his sister-in-law has stolen his mother's keys to the family safe. He confronts her but Kumud tells his mother that Devdas had stolen the keys. His mother believes her and Devdas leaves, banished. Paro arrives at Chandramukhi's brothel, accusing her of driving Devdas to drink, but quickly realizes that Chandramukhi loves Devdas. Paro urges Devdas to stop drinking, but Devdas remains stubborn. He promises Paro that before he dies, he will come to her doorstep one last time.
Paro invites Chandramukhi to a celebration of Durga Puja at her husband's home and introduces her to her in-laws without revealing Chandramukhi's profession. However, Bhuvan's ill-natured son-in-law Kalibabu (Milind Gunaji), a frequent visitor to the brothel, reveals Chandramukhi's background and humiliates her in front of the guests. He also tells Bhuvan of Paro's relationship with Devdas. As a result, Bhuvan permanently forbids Paro from leaving the mansion. Devdas tells Chandramukhi that she must let him go, and decides to travel the country; on a train, he meets his old college friend Chunnibabu (Jackie Shroff), who urges him to drink in the name of friendship. Devdas drinks, knowing full well it will be fatal.
On the verge of death, Devdas travels to Paro's house to honor his promise, collapsing under a tree in front of the main gate. Paro runs through the mansion, attempting to reach him. Bhuvan sees this and orders the servants to shut the gates. Devdas sees a blurred image of Paro running towards him, but the gates close just before she can reach him, leaving her sobbing inside. Devdas whispers Paro's name with his last breath as he slowly dies, and immediately Paro's lamp flickers out.
Shah Rukh Khan as Devdas 'Dev' Mukherjee, the sad heartbroken lover who gets into depression and becomes an alcoholic
Aishwarya Rai Bachchan as Parvati 'Paro' Chakraborty, Devdas's love interest
Madhuri Dixit Nene as Chandramukhi, a courtesan who falls in love with Devdas
Kirron Kher as Sumitra Chakraborty, Paro's Mother
Smita Jaykar as Kaushalya Mukherjee, Devdas's Mother
Ananya Khare as Kumud Mukherjee, Devdas's Sister-in-law
Vijayendra Ghatge as Bhuvan Chaudhry, Paro's Husband
Tiku Talsania as Dharamdas, the mukherjees' Servant
Milind Gunaji as Kalibabu
Jackie Shroff as Chunnilal "Chunnibabu", Devdas's Friend
Manoj Joshi as Dwijdas Mukherjee, Devdas's Brother
Ava Mukherji as Devdas's Badi-ma
Sunil Rege as Neelkanth Chakraborty, Paro's Father
Vijay Crishna as Sir Narayan Mukherjee, Devdas's Father
Jaya Bhattacharya as Manorama
Disha Vakani as Sakhi
Dina Pathak as Bhuvan's Mother
Amardeep Jha as Kalibabu's Mother
Radhika Singh as Yashomati
Apara Mehta as Badi Aapa
Muni Jha as Kaka
The major part of the movie was filmed at Dharavi, Mumbai, recreating the early 20th century Calcutta. Chandramukhi's kotha was constructed next to an artificial lake, to make it look like a set in Benaras on the Ganges. A temple city surrounded the set, for which inspiration was taken from the Dilwara Temples in Rajasthan. For the creation of Paro's room in a haveli 12,20,00,008 pieces of stained glass were used.
The film soundtrack has been predominantly composed by Ismail Darbar, while lyrics have been penned by Nusrat Badr, Prakash Kapadi and Pandit Birju Maharaj. It features playback singers Shreya Ghoshal (as Parvati), Kavita Krishnamurthy (as Chandramukhi), and Udit Narayan (as Devdas). Ghoshal made her Bollywood debut through this film. She caught the attention of Sanjay Leela Bhansali, who noticed her as a participant in Sa Re Ga Ma while she was singing a bhajan of Lata Mangeshkar, and later offered her the opportunity to playback for the character of Paro. The first Bollywood song Ghoshal recorded in her singing career was "Bairi Piya" when she was 16 years old. She sang five songs in the album, which won her much critical acclaim and several accolades, including the prestigious National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer for "Bairi Piya". Aniket Joshi of Planet Bollywood gave 9 stars stating, "Rarely have we an album where ALL the songs are perfectly sung, Devdas is such an album."
Devdas was India's entry for Best Foreign Language Film at the Oscars in 2003.
The film was also screened at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival,
Filmfare Awards
Devdas won ten awards at the 2002 Filmfare Awards, and was the fourth film to win the four major awards (Best Movie, Best Director, Best Actor and Best Actress).
Best Film - Bharat Shah
Best Actor - Shahrukh Khan
Best Actress - Aishwarya Rai Bachchan
Best Director - Sanjay Leela Bhansali
Best Supporting Actress - Madhuri Dixit
Best Female Playback - Shreya Ghoshal and Kavita Krishnamurthy for "Dola Re Dola"
Best Cinematographer - Binod Pradhan
Best Art Direction - Nitin Chandrakant Desai
Best Choreography - Saroj Khan
Best Scene of the Year - Confrontation scene between Parvati and Chandramukhi.
National Film Awards
Devdas won five awards at the 2002 national awards:
National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment
National Film Award for Best Art Direction- Nitin Chandrakant Desai
National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer - Shreya Ghoshal for "Bairi Piya"
National Film Award for Best Choreography - Saroj Khan
National Film Award for Best Costume Design - Neeta Lulla, Abu Jani, Sandeep Khosla and Reza Shariffi
Star Screen Awards
Devdas won five awards at the 2002 Star Screen Awards:
Best Actor - Shahrukh Khan (shared with Ajay Devgan)
Best Actress - Aishwarya Rai
Best Supporting Actress - Madhuri Dixit
Jodi No. 1 - Aishwarya Rai & Shahrukh Khan
Screen Award Best Male Playback - Udit Narayan for "Woh Chand Jaisi Ladki"
IIFA Awards
Devdas won six awards at the 2003 IIFA Awards:
Best Movie - Devdas - Bharat Shah
Best Director - Sanjay Leela Bhansali
Best Actor - Shahrukh Khan
Best Actress - Aishwarya Rai
Best Actress in a Supporting Role - Kirron Kher
Best Female Playback - Shreya Ghoshal and Kavita Krishnamurthy for "Dola Re Dola"
Best Dialogue - Prakash Kapadia
Zee Cine Awards
Devdas won six awards at the 2003 Zee Cine Awards:
Best Film - Bharat Shah
Best Actor – Male - Shahrukh Khan
Best Actor – Female - Aishwarya Rai
Best Director - Sanjay Leela Bhansali
Best Playback Singer – Female - Shreya Ghoshal and Kavita Krishnamurthy for "Dola Re Dola"
Zee Cine Award for True Indian Beauty - Aishwarya Rai
Stardust Awards
New Musical Sensation – Female - Shreya Ghoshal for "Dola Re Dola"
MTV Asia Awards
Devdas won the 2003 Asian Film Award.
British Academy Film Awards
Devdas was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Language Film, 2003.
Devdas grossed ₹68.19 crore (US$10 million) in India and $6.5 million (₹31.68 crore) in other countries, for a worldwide total of ₹99.87 crore (US$15 million), against its ₹44 crore (US$6.5 million) budget. The film had an extraordinary opening worldwide and recorded highest opening weekend and week of the year with collections of ₹19.83 crore (US$2.9 million) and ₹33.45 crore (US$5.0 million) respectively. It is the highest-grossing film of 2002 worldwide.
It opened on Friday, July 12, 2002, across 325 screens, and grossed highest opening day of the year with figure of ₹2.09 crore (US$310,000) nett. It became the second film to gross ₹2 crore (US$300,000) nett opening day after Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham.... It also had highest opening weekend and week of the year with collections of ₹6.15 crore (US$910,000) nett and ₹11.78 crore (US$1.8 million) nett respectively. The film earned a total of ₹41.65 crore (US$6.2 million) nett, and was declared "Hit" by Box Office India. It is the highest-grossing film of 2002 in India.
The film opened to an overwhelming response outside India. It had an opening weekend of $2 million (₹9.75 crore) and went on to gross $2.9 million (₹14.13 crore) in its first week. The film earned a total of $6.5 million (₹31.68 crore). Overseas, It is the highest-grossing film of 2002.
Writing for BBC, Shamaila Khan said it was one of the best films she has ever seen.
List of Indian submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
List of submissions to the 75th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
