Halloween: Resurrection (previously under working titles of Halloween 8 or Halloween: Homecoming) is a 2002 American slasher film that is the eighth installment in the Halloween film series. Directed by Rick Rosenthal, who had also directed Halloween II in 1981, the film builds upon the continuity of Halloween H20: 20 Years Later. It continues with the masked serial killer Michael Myers (Brad Loree) continuing his murderous rampage in his hometown of Haddonfield. Yet, this time, the killer's old, derelict childhood home is being used for a live internet horror show.
The film came out to widely negative critical reviews, having just a 12% score on Rotten Tomatoes, with many claiming it was an unnecessary sequel to the H20 film. Despite the heavy criticism, Resurrection was somewhat of a box office success, with over $30 million made in the box office. Actress Jamie Lee Curtis returned in her long-running role as Laurie Strode; Larry Brand and Sean Hood devised the screenplay. Resurrection is currently the final installment in the original Halloween film series. Although more sequels were planned to follow Resurrection, the series was eventually rebooted with Rob Zombie's 2007 remake of the original Halloween.
Three years after the events of the previous film, Laurie Strode is in a psychiatric facility since she beheaded a paramedic instead of her brother Michael Myers. The paramedic had located the body of Myers in the dining hall of Hillcrest Academy; Myers attacked him, and crushed his larynx so he wouldn't cry out, and switched clothing and his mask. As Laurie drives the coroner's van out of the school, Myers in the paramedic's clothing walks out of the school grounds and goes into hiding for the next three years.
On October 31, 2001, Laurie, pretending to be heavily medicated, prepares herself for the inevitable confrontation. Michael appears at the hospital and kills two security guards, decapitating one and slitting the throat of the other. Laurie lures Michael into a trap, as she attempts to kill him, Michael feigns confusion and pretends to struggle with his mask. Laurie, unable to risk killing another innocent person, starts to remove his mask to make sure that it is her brother. Myers gains the upper hand, and stabs her in the back before sending her off the roof to her death. His mission complete, he returns home.
The following year, college students Bill Woodlake, Donna Chang, Jen Danzig, Jim Morgan, Rudy Grimes and Sara Moyer win a competition to appear on an Internet reality show directed by Freddie Harris and his friend Nora Winston, in which they have to spend a night in Michael's childhood home in order to figure out what led him to kill. On Halloween, each equipped with head-cameras as well as the cameras throughout the house, they search the house and separate into three groups. Sara's messaging friend Deckard watches the broadcast during a Halloween party.
Donna and Jim begin getting intimate in the basement and a wall filled with corpses falls on them. Jim realizes the corpses are fake and the show is a setup. Jim leaves, but Donna notices a tunnel behind the fallen wall. Myers chases her through the tunnels before impaling her on a spike on the wall. At the party, Deckard and other partygoers witness the murder. Deckard realizes that the murder was real, but the others believe it is an act.
Freddie goes through the house dressed as Michael, but is secretly followed by the real Myers. Freddie, mistaking Michael for Charlie (a cameraman who had been killed earlier), tells him to go to the garage and help Nora out. When Rudy, Sara, and Jim find Freddie in the Myers costume, he reveals the scheme to them and begs them to cooperate, telling them that he's set up a nice payday for all of them. When he leaves, the trio decides to gather up the other three and leave. But before they can, Jen discovers the body of Bill (who was stabbed in the head and vanished earlier) and is decapitated by Myers right in front of Rudy, Sara, and Jim. Rudy and Sara flee, but Jim stays to fend off Myers only to have his head crushed. Myers kills Rudy by pinning him to the door with kitchen knives before chasing Sara upstairs.
Locking herself in a bedroom, Sara begs for Deckard to help her. The other party goers realize that the deaths have not been staged. With Deckard messaging her Myers' location, Sara escapes and is found by Freddie. Myers finds and attacks them. Freddie is injured and Sara makes her way to the tunnels. She finds an exit near Donna's body and emerges in the garage, where she finds Nora dead. Myers finds her and starts an electrical fire in the garage. Freddie returns and begins fighting Myers hand-to-hand. When he is overpowered, Freddie instead electrocutes Myers, tangling him up in electrical wiring before carrying Sara out of the burning garage.
Myers' body and the bodies of his victims are taken to the morgue. As the medical examiner begins to examine Myers' body, Myers' eyes open, and the scene cuts to black.
Jamie Lee Curtis as Laurie Strode
Bianca Kajlich as Sara Moyer
Busta Rhymes as Freddie Harris
Katee Sackhoff as Jennifer 'Jen' Danzig
Daisy McCrackin as Donna Chang
Sean Patrick Thomas as Rudy Grimes
Luke Kirby as Jim Morgan
Thomas Ian Nicholas as Bill Woodlake
Tyra Banks as Nora Winston
Ryan Merriman as Myles Deckard Barton
Brad Loree as Michael Myers
Billy Kay as Scott
Lorena Gale as Nurse Wells
Marisa Rudiak as Nurse Phillips
Brent Chapman as Franklin Munroe
Dan Joffre as Willie Haines
Gus Lynch as Harold Trumble
Haig Sutherland as Aron
Brad Sihvon as Charley Albans
Rick Rosenthal as Professor Mixter
According to the Halloween: 25 Years of Terror documentary DVD, Miramax wanted to take Michael Myers out of the film but Moustapha Akkad and the fans disagreed and insisted that it would be another "Michael Myers piece". After learning a lesson with Halloween III: Season of the Witch, a movie that had experimented with a different story-line and failed to achieve expected success, Miramax had decided not to develop another sequel without the Myers character. The film's working title was Halloween: The Homecoming, but its producers wanted a title that said Michael Myers is alive, so in February 2002, the film was officially renamed Halloween: Resurrection. Also, the release date for the film was originally set as September 21, 2001, but producers at Dimension Films wanted the film to be stronger so re-shoots took place from September to October 2001. The release date was thus changed to April 19, 2002 and then again to July 12, 2002.
Both Whitney Ransick and Dwight H. Little were approached to direct the film but turned it down. Later Rick Rosenthal, the director of Halloween II, was chosen to direct. During the casting period of the film, producers considered Danielle Harris (who played Jamie Lloyd in Halloween 4: The Return of Michael Myers and Halloween 5: The Revenge of Michael Myers) for a role in the film. In post production Bianca Kajlich's screams had to be dubbed because of her inability to scream. The film's trailer was delivered on April 26, 2002 with the release of Jason X. Principal photography began in Vancouver, British Columbia in 2001 with the opening scene filmed at Riverview Hospital in Coquitlam, BC.
Halloween: Resurrection's delayed production and reshoots meant at least two alternate versions exist. The first workprint, titled onscreen as Halloween: The Homecoming, contained differences, some of which appeared on the DVD release including an alternate opening, multiple alternate endings, deleted scenes and an alternate score. Screencaps from a second workprint featuring deleted and alternate footage have been posted online, but copies are rare. This workprint is rumored to include the following deleted scenes, some of which are viewable on the retail DVD and YouTube.
Jamie Lee Curtis was contractually obligated for a 30-second cameo in the film, but reportedly was so interested in the story that she agreed to do a full four-day shoot and appeared in the entire opening sequence.
The film's original director was Whitney Ransick, who was let go right before filming started due to the studio wanting a more experienced director.
For this eighth installment of the series, Danny Lux created a genuine score relying upon the original instead of generating something new. He approaches the score with an electro-acoustic feel that dates back to the synthesizer scores of the '80s. The film also features several rap and hip-hop songs.
In direct contrast to general critical reviews of the film, some assessments of its sound and theme music have been praising. For example, critic Steve Newton complimented the film's "creepy" and "unsettling" revival of the original Halloween movie's theme while panning the film itself as well as the rap tracks included.
Halloween: Resurrection concludes with the potential for another sequel to continue the story, Josh Hartnett was originally planned to reprise his role as John Tate and seek revenge for his mother's death. Although there were plans for a new Halloween movie to continue after Resurrection, no such film has yet been produced to continue the original series. Dimension Films would instead produce a remake of the original Halloween in 2007, which was directed by Rob Zombie. A sequel to Zombie's remake was released two years later on August 28, 2009. Talk of some kind of a follow up to Halloween: Resurrection specifically has come up over the years but nothing has yet come of it.
Halloween: Resurrection was released on July 12, 2002 in the US to moderate reception which did not change in its later international release. The film peaked at #4 on its opening weekend on US screens raking in $12,292,121 behind Reign of Fire, Road to Perdition and Men in Black II. It grossed $30,354,442 domestically and a further $7,310,413 for a moderate $37,664,855 worldwide gross.
The film received highly unfavorable reviews from several critics. It has garnered a score of 12% on Rotten Tomatoes based on 59 reviews and a 13% among top critics based on 16 reviews, with the site's consensus being: "The only thing this tired slasher flick may resurrect is nostalgia for when the genre was still fresh and scary." Lou Lumenick of the New York Post said, "It's so devoid of joy and energy it makes even 'Jason X' look positively Shakespearian by comparison." Dave Kehr of The New York Times said, "Spectators will indeed sit open-mouthed before the screen, not screaming but yawning." Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine said, "Every sequel you skip will be two hours gained. Consider this review life-affirming." Joe Leydon of Variety said, "[Seems] even more uselessly redundant and shamelessly money-grubbing than most third-rate horror sequels." PopMatters and WorldsGreatestCritic.com journalist J.C. Maçek III wrote, "The special effects are silly, the situations are contrived and the dialogue is alternately weak and humorous. When the final credits roll, most of us with a proverbial LICK of sense realize that it just doesn't add up, man (it really, really doesn't, folks)." Glenn Lovell of the San Jose Mercury News was slightly more positive: "No, it's not as single-minded as John Carpenter's original, but it's sure a lot smarter and more unnerving than the sequels."
List of films featuring surveillance
