Claudia Ciesla (born February 12) is a Polish-German model and actress. She is most prominent in playing roles in Bollywood. She was a contestant in Bigg Boss 3.
Born in Wodzisław Śląski, Poland, part of Silesia. Her father is Polish, her mother is German and she has two older sisters.
Claudia Ciesla started modeling at the age of 15 working for shows involved in fashion and dancing.
In March 2006, Ciesla won a subscribers poll on the internet websites of Auto Bild, Bild, Sat.1, T-Online and Kabeleins to give her first place as Germany's Super Girl 2006. In November 2007 she told in an interview, that she plans after her modelling career to become a tax consultant.
In 2008 Claudia Ciesla was in Austria chosen for the Snow Queen 2008. In the touristic season 2007-2008 she was representing the snowrichest tourist Ski-Village in the World, and was showing up on various events and promotional appearances, photo shoots for magazines, advertising and brochures, and did a cover shoot for the magazine “MOTOR-Freizeit and TRENDS“ in Austria.
In 2007 and again in 2008 she was appearing on the German Internet soap opera Beach House, playing Daisy Vandenburg. The New Indian Express reported that Ciesla is acting in a Bollywood film Karma along with leads Carlucci Weyant, Alma Saraci as part of an international filmcrew to be filmed in India. Film Director M.S. Shahjahan mentioned in an interview that there will be more assignments for Ciesla in Bollywood.
In July 2008 Ciesla played "Claudia" in the Italian television sitcom Outsiders in Palermo, shot in Palermo.
She played the role of a German journalist in the film 10:10 (directed by "Arin Paul"), together with Soumitra Chatterjee.
Claudia Ciesla was the Brand Ambassador of the "Lovely Professional University". The LPU University also honoured her as "New promising foreign face in India". She also visited Thapar University for promotion of her Punjabi film during their technical fest Aranya. She was awarded with the prestigious Karmaveer Puraskaar Award for her involvement in social work on 26 November 2009. The Karmaveer Puraskaar, is iCONGO’s National People’s Award for Social Justice and Action that honours concerned citizens. In the past, Kajol, and social activist Alyque Padamsee, Rahul Bose, Remo Fernandes, M S Swaminathan (Father of the Green Revolution in India) have been recipients of the Karmaveer Puraskar.
Ciesla was at the Bigg Boss house in the third season of the reality show Bigg Boss (Season 3). It began airing on 4 October 2009 on Colors with Amitabh Bachchan as the host. This was her first brush with Indian reality TV. She was evicted on day 68, after spending 10 weeks on the show.
In December 2010 Claudia attended the TV show Zor Ka Jhatka: Total Wipeout shot in Buenos Aires, Argentina. It is the Indian celebrity version of Wipeout with Bollywood actor Shah Rukh Khan as the host. The show ended on February 25, 2011 with Kushal Punjabi as the winner, while Claudia Ciesla was the runner-up by 51 seconds, to come in second place.
Claudia Ciesla has done her first item song "Balma" sharing screen space with Akshay Kumar in his film Khiladi 786. The song is composed by Himesh Reshammiya and the dancing is choreographed by Ganesh Acharya.
Claudia Ciesla is soon going to be seen in the most successful franchise Kya Kool Hai Hum 3.
