Critters 3 is a 1991 American science fiction horror comedy film and is the third installment of the Critters series, directed by Kristine Peterson and is also Leonardo DiCaprio's film debut. Cary Elwes mentioned on the commentary for the uncut edition DVD of Saw that he passed on the role of Josh. It was shot back-to-back with its sequel, Critters 4. Unlike the first two films, it does not take place in the town of Grover's Bend.
Sometime after the events in Critters 2, Charlie MacFadden is tracking down the last of the Critters. A family of three – Annie (the main protagonist), Johnny (her little brother) and Clifford (the father) – stops at a rest stop when their car's tire pops. At the rest stop, Charlie warns them and Josh, stepson of a corrupt landlord, about the Critters. As this happens, a Critter lays eggs under the family's car and the family leaves, unknowingly taking the eggs with them. Soon after they arrive at their tenement, the Critters hatch and attack the sleazy maintenance man, Frank. When the landlord arrives, he too is eaten by the Critters after Josh locks him in Clifford's room, unknowingly trapping his stepfather with the creatures. Next, one of the residents is attacked and wounded. Annie, her family and five others (including Josh) try to get to safety in one piece by getting to the roof of the building. Charlie arrives and destroys the remaining Critters, saving the remaining tenants. The film ends in a cliffhanger as Charlie is about to destroy two Critter eggs, but is ordered not to and a containment pod sent from the Intergalactic Council crashes into the basement.
Aimee Brooks as Annie
Leonardo DiCaprio as Josh
Don Keith Opper as Charlie MacFadden
John Calvin as Clifford
Nina Axelrod as Betty Briggs
William Dennis Hunt as Briggs
Geoffrey Blake as Frank
Christian & Joseph Cousins as Johnny
Terrence Mann as Ug
Jose Luis Valensuela as Mario
Diane Bellamy as Rosalie
Katherine Cortez as Marcia
Frances Bay as Mrs. Menges
Bill Zuckert as Mr. Menges
The film was released direct to video in the United States by New Line Home Video in December 1991. In 2003, New Line Home Entertainment released it on DVD. The film's distribution rights were transferred to Warner Bros. in 2008. The film was re-released in a set containing all 4 Critters films on DVD by Warner Bros. in 2010.
Critters 3 is followed by Critters 4, directed by Rupert Harvey.
