Sunny Lane(born March 2, 1980) is the stage name of an American pornographic actress and nude model.
Sunny Lane's parents, Shelby and Mike, worked in air-freight. In her youth she was a competitive roller skater and ice skater, and later worked as an instructor teaching yoga and pilates.
She trained as an ice dancer under James Millns and was in preparations for the Olympic trials when she required bunion surgery. Unable to skate due to the recovery period, she started dancing nude in order to support herself financially. She became an exotic dancer and won Déjà Vu Showgirl of the Year during her first year of dancing in 2004. Lane was invited to attend the AVN Awards ceremony in 2005 by Serenity, where at an after-show party hosted by Sean Michaels she encountered an agent from Playboy. She started to act in adult movies in the same year.
Her career is supported and managed by her parents, with whom she lives in an apartment. Lane credits her parents' participation in naturist recreation, and generalized "free thinking" and "open minded" attitudes for their comfort with her involvement in the adult entertainment industry. She attributes the ease with which she was able to transition from ice skating to adult entertainment to the body image instilled by her own practice of naturism with her parents at home during her childhood.
She appeared on the first episode of the Fox reality series My Bare Lady which aired December 7, 2006 and on an episode of ABC Primetime: The Outsiders defending her career. Television audiences also saw her with her parents on Fox News' Geraldo at Large on March 18, 2007, using the alias, "Sunny Lee". Lane was featured on the television show Pants-Off Dance-Off, on Fuse TV.
She has also worked at the Nevada brothel, the Moonlite BunnyRanch, at various times in her career.
Her performance in the 2007 film Goo Girls 26 earned Lane the 2008 AVN award for Best POV Sex Scene. In 2008 she starred in Big Wet Asses 13 performing her first anal scene; the scene won the AVN Award for best anal scene.
Lane is a fan of Paramore and playing racing video games.
Lane is bisexual. In June 2011 Lane announced that she was engaged and was taking a hiatus from active shooting to focus on her upcoming marriage.
In November 2012 she announced her return to the adult industry to star in Not the Love Boat XXX and other adult movies as well as to entertain clients at the World Famous Moonlite Bunnyranch.
2005 NightMoves Award – New Starlet (Editor’s Choice)
2006 F.O.X.E. Award – Vixen
2006 NightMoves Award – Miss Congeniality Award
2007 Adam Film World Guide Award – Actress Of The Year – Sex Pix
2007 Adultcon Award – Best actress for an intercourse performance – Slut Puppies 2
2008 AVN Award – Best POV Sex Scene – Goo Girls 26
2008 NightMoves Award – Best Feature Dancer (Fan’s Choice)
2009 AVN Award – Best Anal Sex Scene – Big Wet Asses 13 (with Manuel Ferrara)
2014 XRCO Award – Best Cumback
2014 NightMoves Hall of Fame inductee
