Henry Pryce Jackman (born 1974) is an English composer, conductor, arranger, pianist, musician, and songwriter. He is best known for composing major hit films such as X-Men: First Class, Wreck-It Ralph, Captain Phillips, Captain America: The Winter Soldier, Captain America: Civil War, Kick-Ass, Kick-Ass 2, Big Hero 6 and The Interview, as well as the video game Uncharted 4: A Thief's End.
Jackman was born in Hillingdon, Middlesex. He studied classical music at St. Paul's Cathedral Choir School, Eton College, Framlingham College and University of Oxford.
Jackman has done programming and production work with artists including Mike Oldfield (Voyager), Sally Oldfield (Flaming Star), Trevor Horn/Art of Noise (The Seduction of Claude Debussy), Elton John and Gary Barlow. He co-produced Seal's unreleased 2001 album Togetherland. "This Could Be Heaven", released from the album, was also co-written by Jackman and used on the movie The Family Man and included on the deluxe edition of Seal's compilation album Hits.
Jackman has released three albums, Utopia (2003), Transfiguration (2005) and Acoustica (2007; with Augustus Isadore).
Jackman had various minor roles on film scores since 2006, generally working with mentor Hans Zimmer, including for The Da Vinci Code (music programmer), The Dark Knight (music arranger) and additional music for Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest, At World's End, The Simpsons Movie, Kung Fu Panda and Hancock. In 2009, Jackman, Zimmer and John Powell won the 2008 Annie Award for Music in an Animated Television Production or Short Form for their work on DreamWorks Animation's Secrets of the Furious Five (a sequel to Kung Fu Panda). He has since composed soundtracks for Monsters vs. Aliens, Henri IV, Gulliver's Travels, X-Men: First Class, Winnie the Pooh, Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter, Wreck-It Ralph and Captain America: The Winter Soldier. His first major video game score was Uncharted 4: A Thief's End.
Henry Pryce Jackman is the son of keyboardist and arranger Andrew Pryce Jackman, who was a member of The Syn and worked for many years with Chris Squire of Yes. Henry Jackman himself and members of Spock's Beard formed the backing band for a one-off live performance by Chris Squire in August 2006. His uncle Gregg Jackman is a sound engineer and producer who has worked with Yes and Barclay James Harvest; Henry and his uncle both worked on Moa's 1999 album Universal. His grandfather, Bill Jackman, played clarinet on "When I'm Sixty-Four" on The Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.
Mike Oldfield, "Women of Ireland" (1997): co-produced, programming
Elton John & LeAnn Rimes, "Written in the Stars" (1999): programming
Jocelyn Brown, "I Believe" (1999): programming, mixing
Seal, "This Could Be Heaven" (2000): co-written, co-produced, programming
Mike Oldfield, Voyager (1997): co-produced, programming
Sally Oldfield, Flaming Star
Conner Reeves, Earthbound (1998): programming
Michael Gordon, Weather (1998): production, sound design
Art of Noise, The Seduction of Claude Debussy (1999): "Born on a Sunday" co-produced, co-written
Moa, Universal (1999): writing, producing, mixing
Maryanna Matiss, Time to Fly (2001): writing, producing, mixing
Seal, Togetherland (2001/unreleased): producing, programming
Hans Zimmer, The Holiday OST (2006): co-writing
Vantage Point OST (2008): co-writing
various artists, Monsters vs. Aliens OST (2009): writing
Utopia (WestOneMusic, 2003)
Transfiguration (KPM Music, 2005)
Acoustica (KPM Music, 2007)
