The 33rd Academy Awards, honoring the best in film for 1960, were held on April 17, 1961, at the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium in Santa Monica, California. They were hosted by Bob Hope. This was the first ceremony to be aired on ABC television, which has aired the Academy Awards ever since (save for the mid-1970s, when they were aired on NBC for the first time since the previous year.)
Gary Cooper was too ill to attend the ceremony, so his close friend James Stewart accepted the Honorary Oscar on his behalf. Stewart's emotional speech hinted that something was seriously wrong, and the next day newspapers ran the headline, "Gary Cooper has cancer." One month later, on May 13, 1961, six days after his 60th birthday, Cooper died.
The Apartment marked the last black and white film to win Best Picture during the era when use of black and white film was still common, as well as the last until 1993 when Schindler's List won.
Despite receiving mixed-to-negative reception and bombing at the box office, The Alamo received several Oscar nominations over better-regarded and prestigious films Psycho, Spartacus, and Swiss Family Robinson. This was largely due to intense lobbying by the film's lead actor, producer, and director John Wayne. The film is thought to have been denied awards because Academy voters were alienated by an overblown publicity campaign by Wayne, particularly one Variety ad claiming that the film's cast was praying harder for Chill Wills to win his award than the defenders of the Alamo prayed for their lives before the battle. The ad, placed by Wills, reportedly angered Wayne, who took out an ad of his own deploring Wills' tastelessness. In response to Wills' ad, claiming that all the voters were his "Alamo Cousins," Groucho Marx took out a small ad which simply said, "Dear Mr. Wills, I am delighted to be your cousin, but I voted for Sal Mineo," (Wills' rival nominee for Exodus).
Winners are listed first and highlighted with boldface
Gary Cooper
Stan Laurel
Hayley Mills
Sol Lesser
Steve Allen and Jayne Meadows (Presenters: Best Original Song)
Polly Bergen and Richard Widmark (Presenters: Best Visual Effects)
Yul Brynner (Presenter: Best Actress)
Kitty Carlisle and Moss Hart (Presenters: Writing Awards)
Cyd Charisse and Tony Martin (Presenters: Cinematography Awards)
Betty Comden and Adolph Green (Presenters: Best Film Editing)
Wendell Corey and Susan Strasberg (Presenters: Short Subjects Awards)
Tony Curtis and Janet Leigh (Presenters: Documentary Awards)
Bobby Darin and Sandra Dee (Presenters: Music Awards)
Greer Garson (Presenter: Best Actor)
Hugh Griffith (Presenter: Best Supporting Actress)
Audrey Hepburn (Presenter: Best Picture)
Jim Hutton and Paula Prentiss (Presenters: Best Sound Recording)
Eric Johnston (Presenter: Best Foreign Language Film)
Danny Kaye (Presenter: Honorary Award to Stan Laurel)
Gina Lollobrigida (Presenter: Best Director)
Tina Louise and Tony Randall (Presenters: Art Direction-Set Decoration Awards)
Barbara Rush and Robert Stack (Presenters: Costume Design Awards)
Eva Marie Saint (Presenter: Best Supporting Actor)
Shirley Temple (Presenter: Juvenile Award to Hayley Mills)
William Wyler (Presenter: Honorary Award to Gary Cooper)
The Brothers Four ("The Green Leaves of Summer" from The Alamo)
Connie Francis ("Never on Sunday" from Never on Sunday)
The Hi-Lo's ("The Facts of Life" from The Facts of Life)
Jane Morgan ("The Second Time Around" from High Time)
Sarah Vaughan ("The Faraway Part of Town" from Pepe)
18th Golden Globe Awards
1960 in film
3rd Grammy Awards
12th Primetime Emmy Awards
13th Primetime Emmy Awards
14th British Academy Film Awards
15th Tony Awards
