Jake Matthew Lloyd (born March 5, 1989), also known as Jake Broadbent, is an American former actor who gained fame when he was chosen by George Lucas to play young Anakin Skywalker in the 1999 film Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace, the first in the Star Wars prequel trilogy. He reprised this role in six subsequent Star Wars video games.
Jake Matthew Lloyd was born in Fort Collins, Colorado, the son of William 'Bill' Lloyd, an E.M.T. set medic, and Lisa Riley, an entertainment agent.
Lloyd began his acting career in 1996, playing Jimmy Sweet in 4 episodes of ER. He was then cast as Jake Warren in Unhook the Stars. He got his big break playing Jamie Langston in Jingle All The Way. He also played Mark Armstrong in Apollo 11.
Lloyd gained worldwide fame when he was chosen by George Lucas to play the young Anakin Skywalker in the 1999 film Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace, the first film in the Star Wars prequel trilogy.
After portraying Anakin in a chain of related video games, Lloyd retired from acting in 2001, citing bullying on the part of classmates and the stress of doing up to 60 interviews a day as his reasons for doing so.
Lloyd attended Carmel High School in Carmel, Indiana. He left Hollywood for Chicago, and dropped out after a semester at Columbia College Chicago, where he studied film and psychology.
Lloyd continues to make appearances at sci-fi and comic-book festivals. In 2012, he announced he was directing a documentary highlighting the Tibetan refugees in India, who are attempting to escape persecution by the Chinese.
Lloyd was commissioned in 2012 to create a promo for singer Mallory Low's song, and Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones actor Daniel Logan, who played young Boba Fett in that movie, was cast as the star in his video.
Lloyd currently lives in Indianapolis, Indiana.
On June 17, 2015, Lloyd (going by the name Jake Broadbent) was arrested for reckless driving, driving without a license, and resisting arrest. His mother, Lisa, stated that Lloyd suffers from schizophrenia and that the driving incident was brought on by him having failed to take his medication. She added that Lloyd attacked her at her home in Indianapolis the previous March 26, also due to his struggles with the condition. In April 2016, he was transferred to a psychiatric facility after being diagnosed with schizophrenia.
