Howard Gordon (born March 31, 1961) is an American television writer and producer.
He is well known for his work on the Fox action series 24 alongside the Showtime thriller Homeland, which he co-developed with Alex Gansa and Gideon Raff, and for the FX political drama Tyrant, which he co-developed with Craig Wright. He also produced the critically acclaimed but short lived NBC science fiction thriller Awake.
Gordon was born in Queens, New York City and graduated from Roslyn High School. He grew up in a Jewish family. After graduating from Princeton in 1984, Gordon came to Los Angeles with fellow filmmaker Alex Gansa to pursue a career in writing for television. Both broke into the industry with single episodes of ABC's Spenser: For Hire. Their Spenser work turned industry heads, and the pair joined the Emmy-nominated series Beauty and the Beast as staff writers, and were later named producers.
In 1990, the Gansa-Gordon team was signed to a two-year deal with Witt-Thomas Productions, during which they produced several pilots. One was an ABC project called Country Estates, which caught the attention of famed producer Chris Carter.
Soon after, Carter invited Gordon and Gansa to join The X-Files as supervising producers; Gordon wrote or co-wrote several scripts each season, before departing from the series in 1997 to pursue other projects.
After co-writing one episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Gordon created his own show, the short-lived Strange World in 1999. Strange World went to seed 13 episodes in, but Gordon and Strange World writer Tim Minear's services were quickly snapped up by Buffy creator Joss Whedon on another project: Angel. After two years with Angel, Gordon jumped ship in 2001 for FOX's successful 24, where he would write several episodes in Seasons 1 & 2, then crafted the entire story arcs for Seasons 3 and 4. Gordon temporarily left 24 in the middle of the 2004 season to re-join Minear, this time as co-creator of another FOX series, The Inside. Despite The Inside 's cancellation and short run, talk circulated of including the two Minear-Gordon series, Strange World and The Inside, on a special DVD set sometime in 2006.
Beginning in 2006, Gordon became 24's showrunner, a title he held through its final season.
In 2010, after finishing 24, Gordon began co-developing (along with Gideon Raff and Alex Gansa) the thriller Homeland for Showtime. Based on the Israeli series Prisoners of War, it centers on a woman (Claire Danes) who works for the CIA and is convinced a recently returned American prisoner of war (Damian Lewis) has been turned by al-Qaeda. The show premiered Sunday, October 2, 2011, at 10/9 central. It has been met with major critical acclaim and maintained a steady viewership rating throughout its first season. Showtime is now running its fourth season, which premiered on October 5, 2014.
In 2012, he won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for writing the "Pilot" of Homeland and the series itself won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series.
In 2011, Gordon signed on to NBC's new Kyle Killen fantasy pilot Awake as an executive producer. When NBC picked the project up to series status, Gordon added writer and showrunner to his occupational duties on the show. The series only ran from March 1 to May 24, 2012 before it was cancelled.
Most recently, 2015 would see him working as an executive producer on the horror-drama series Frankenstein for Fox Television Network. The pilot for Frankenstein is based on a script written by Rand Ravich, who'll also be working as an executive producer on the series.
