Allisyn Ashley Arm (born April 25, 1996) is an American actress and sketch comedian. Arm is most known for her main role as Zora Lancaster on Sonny with a Chance and in Disney Channel's sketch comedy series So Random!
Allisyn Ashley Arm was born on April 25, 1996 in Glendale, California to Steve and Anji Arm. After seeing a number of plays in the Los Angeles area, her parents saw her act when she was half a year old and decided to put her into an acting school in Arizona.
The first acting job Arm booked was for a Bounty commercial that never aired. Despite the fact that her first attempt at commercial acting was done in vain, she eventually starred in many televised advertisements that did air; and in May 2002, she was cast in her very first television appearance on the medical drama series: Strong Medicine. She would go on to make appearances in episodes of Friends, 10-8, Miracles, and Judging Amy. Arm also had roles on films such as Man of the House and King of California with Twilight’s Ashley Greene. In 2009, Arm appeared as Zora in the Disney Channel original series Sonny with a Chance during the show, Arm was absent and reappeared from her role in several episodes and returned for the role in the sketch comedy series So Random! in 2011. She also appeared in Amber Lily's music video "Overloadin" with her So Random! co-star Audrey Whitby in 2011. Arm recently voiced the character Stormy in the Disney Junior series Jake and the Never Land Pirates.
Allisyn Ashley Arm later developed a YouTube personality named Astrid Clover and is assisted by Caleb Pierce as Gilly, Audrey Whitby as Rain, Jonathon McClendon as Kale Murry, Autumn Wendel as Autumn, Jacey Tomlinson as Jacey, Dylan Riley Snyder as Boom Guy, Tess Baines as Luna, Joey Luthman as Beckett, Matthew Scott Montgomery as Stacy-John, Austin James as Wesley, Cooper Green as Cooper, Elizabeth Johnson as Harmony, Emily Cavalluzzi as Olive, Keely Marshall as Finley, Shauna Case as Tessa, Sam Lant as Colton, and Josie Arm as Astrid's sister Bliss Clover.
As a supporter of PETA, Allisyn Ashley Arm has been a vegetarian since 5 years old where she went Vegan at age 12 where her whole family is vegetarian. Arm later attended the grand opening of the Bob Barker Building that was established by Bob Barker.
In an interview with People; Arm said, "I watch a lot of SNL skits online. I love Chris Farley and Jim Carrey. I always think, 'What would Jim Carrey do in this scene?' He's a lot of my inspiration for my character (Zora)."
