Christophe Guy Denis Lambert (born 29 March 1957), known as Christopher Lambert, is a French actor. He may be best known for his role as Connor MacLeod—"The Highlander"—in the movie and subsequent movie franchise series of the same name. He is also known for his roles as Tarzan in Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan, Lord of the Apes and as the thunder god Raiden in the first movie adaptation of the video game Mortal Kombat.
Lambert was born in Great Neck, New York. His father was a French diplomat in the United Nations. Lambert was raised in Geneva, Switzerland from infancy, and moved to Paris in his teens.
After appearing in supporting parts in several French films, Lambert was discovered by international audiences when director Hugh Hudson cast him in the title role of Greystoke: The Legend of Tarzan, Lord of the Apes (1984). That same year, he also played his first lead role in a French film by appearing opposite Catherine Deneuve in Paroles et musique.
In 1985, Lambert played the male lead in Luc Besson's Subway, for which he was awarded a César Award for Best Actor the next year. Highlander (1986), in which he starred as Connor MacLeod, was an international success, as well as his most famous role. He appeared in all three sequels that were released in cinemas – although he was not in the 2007 movie made for the Sci-Fi Channel – and had a cameo appearance in the pilot episode of the television series. Lambert also appeared as MacLeod in the music video for Queen's "Princes of the Universe".
The Sicilian, directed by Michael Cimino and starring Lambert as Salvatore Giuliano, was released in 1987, and was less successful than his previous pictures, receiving a lukewarm reception by critics and being only marginally profitable. To Kill a Priest, in which he played a character based on Jerzy Popiełuszko, was well received by critics but was a financial failure. Lacking a recent box-office success, Lambert agreed to appear in the first Highlander sequel, Highlander II: The Quickening, which was poorly received.
During the 1990s, Lambert starred in action, thriller and science fiction films such as Knight Moves, Fortress (1992), Gunmen (1994) and Mean Guns (1997), and the Italian-produced Nirvana (1997). His filmography included low-budget films such as Adrenalin: Fear the Rush, which were generally poorly received by critics. Some of his films had only a direct-to-video release. In the course of that decade, Lambert also occasionally appeared in French films such as Max et Jérémie (1992).
In 1995, he played the role of the thunder god Raiden in a movie adaptation of the popular video game series Mortal Kombat. Lambert was interested in reprising his character in the sequel, Mortal Kombat: Annihilation, but he was committed to his role in Beowulf (1999), and the role was given to James Remar. Lambert is also active as a film producer and has produced French films such as Patrick Braoudé's Génial, mes parents divorcent (1990) and Neuf mois (1994). In 2001, he played the lead role of Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix in the France-Canada production Druids, which was a critical and financial failure.
In 2009, Lambert was a lead in Claire Denis' White Material; both the film and Lambert's performance received critical acclaim. Lambert had a role in the Marvel Comics film Ghost Rider: Spirit of Vengeance in 2012.
He underwent sword training for three months and shaved his head. Shortly afterwards, he appeared as Marcel Janvier, alias "the Chameleon", in 6 episodes of NCIS: Los Angeles.
Lambert was married to Diane Lane from October 1988 to 1994. They have a daughter, Eleanor Jasmine.
Lambert married Jaiymse Haft on 6 February 1999 but that union was dissolved. Since 2007, he had been in a relationship with Sophie Marceau, with whom he appeared in La disparue de Deauville. They married in 2012 and announced their separation on 11 July 2014.
Lambert is currently dating for the second time Italian actress and activist Alba Parietti, with whom he had a relationship twenty years before, in 1996.
Lambert has profound myopia and cannot see without his glasses. Because he cannot wear contact lenses, he is often forced to act while virtually blind. This has led to injuries while performing his own stunts without glasses.
Along with owning a mineral water business and food processing plant, Lambert produces Côtes-du-Rhône wines with partner Eric Beaumard at a vineyard located in Sainte-Cécile-les-Vignes, France. He is also sole owner of Lamb Bear Productions, the name of the company is a play on his name "pronounced Lamb-bear".
