The year 1972 in film involved several significant cinematic events including the release of Francis Ford Coppola's Academy Award-winning film, The Godfather.
The top ten 1972 released films by box office gross in North America are as follows:
Academy Awards:
Best Picture: The Godfather - Albert S. Ruddy, Paramount
Best Director : Bob Fosse - Cabaret
Best Actor: Marlon Brando - The Godfather (declined)
Best Actress: Liza Minnelli - Cabaret
Best Supporting Actor; Joel Grey - Cabaret
Best Supporting Actress : Eileen Heckart - Butterflies Are Free
Best Foreign Language Film: The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie (Le Charme discret de la bourgeoisie), directed by Luis Buñuel, France
Golden Globe Awards:
Drama:
Best Picture: The Godfather
Best Actor: Marlon Brando - The Godfather
Best Actress: Liv Ullmann - The Emigrants
Musical or comedy:
Best Picture: Cabaret
Best Actor: Jack Lemmon - Avanti!
Best Actress: Liza Minnelli - Cabaret
Other
Best Director: Francis Ford Coppola - The Godfather
Best Foreign Language Film (tie): The Emigrants (Utvandrarna), Sweden
Best Foreign Language Film (tie): The New Land (Nybyggarna), Sweden
Palme d'Or (Cannes Film Festival):
The Working Class Goes to Heaven (La classe operaia va in paradiso), directed by Elio Petri, Italy
The Mattei Affair (Il Caso Mattei), directed by Francesco Rosi, Italy
Golden Bear (Berlin Film Festival):
The Canterbury Tales (I Racconti di Canterbury), directed by Pier Paolo Pasolini, Italy / France
U.S.A. unless stated
January 1972
1 January
J. W. Coop
2 January
Glass Houses
3 January
The Hot Rock
14 January
Cisco Pike
To Find a Man
21 January
Zee and Co.
26 January
The Hot Rock
February 1972
13 February
Cabaret
March 1972
8 March
Tales from the Crypt (U.K.)
10 March
Silent Running
What's Up, Doc?
12 March
Godzilla vs. Gigan - (Japan)
15 March
Slaughterhouse-Five
17 March
Pink Flamingos
22 March
The Biscuit Eater
23 March
The Concert for Bangladesh
24 March
The Godfather
April 1972
12 April
Fritz the Cat
16 April
The Culpepper Cattle Co.
30 April
Vampire Circus (U.K.)
May 1972
4 May
Play It Again, Sam
12 May
The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid
24 May
The Possession of Joel Delaney
25 May
Z.P.G.
26 May
The Other
June 1972
2 June
The War Between Men and Women
4 June
A Day in the Death of Joe Egg
6 June
Butterflies Are Free
12 June
The Groundstar Conspiracy
20 June
The Assassination of Trotsky (U.K.)
21 June
Frenzy
Beware! The Blob
23 June
Ben
29 June
Come Back, Charleston Blue
30 June
Conquest of the Planet of the Apes
July 1972
12 July
Now You See Him, Now You Don't
19 July
The Man
23 August
To Kill a Clown
26 July
Fat City
30 July
Deliverance
Napoleon and Samantha
August 1972
9 August
Snoopy, Come Home
25 August
Blacula
30 August
The Last House on the Left
Deliverance
September 1972
1 September
Bluebeard
13 September
The Ruling Class
15 September
The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie
21 September
Cancel My Reservation
24 September
Sounder
28 September
Dracula A.D. 1972
October 1972
18 October
Run, Cougar, Run
19 October
When the Legends Die
November 1972
Dirty Little Billy
1 November
Trouble Man
17 November
Asylum (U.K.)
22 November
Rage
December 1972
2 December
Brother Sun, Sister Moon
8 December
Sleuth (U.K.)
12 December
Child's Play
13 December
The Getaway
17 December
Avanti!
The Heartbreak Kid
Travels with My Aunt
19 December
Across 110th Street
21 December
Jeremiah Johnson
22 December
Snowball Express
30 December
Way of the Dragon
U.S.A. unless stated
#
The 14 Amazons (Shi si nu ying hao), starring Lisa Lu - (Hong Kong)
1776, starring William Daniels, Howard Da Silva, John Cullum, Ken Howard, Blythe Danner
A
Across 110th Street, starring Anthony Quinn and Yaphet Kotto
The Adventures of Barry McKenzie, directed by Bruce Beresford, starring Barry Crocker, Barry Humphries, Peter Cook, Spike Milligan - (Australia)
Aguirre, the Wrath of God (Aguirre, der Zorn Gottes), directed by Werner Herzog, starring Klaus Kinski- (West Germany)
The Amazing Mr. Blunden, starring Laurence Naismith and Lynne Frederick - (U.K.)
Angry Guest (E ke), directed by Chang Cheh - (Hong Kong)
Another Nice Mess, starring Rich Little
Antony and Cleopatra, directed by and starring Charlton Heston, with Hildegarde Neil - (U.K.)
Apna Desh (Our Country), starring Rajesh Khanna and Mumtaz - (India)
The Assassination of Trotsky, starring Richard Burton and Alain Delon - (Italy)
Asylum, starring Britt Ekland, Barbara Parkins, Charlotte Rampling, Peter Cushing, Barry Morse
Avanti!, directed by Billy Wilder, starring Jack Lemmon and Juliet Mills
Les aventures galantes de Zorro
B
Bad Company, directed by Robert Benton, starring Jeff Bridges and Barry Brown
Baharo Phool Barsao - (Pakistan)
Baron Blood (Gli orrori del castello di Norimberga), directed by Mario Bava, starring Joseph Cotten and Elke Sommer - (Italy)
Bartleby, starring Paul Scofield - (U.K.)
Bawarchi (The Chef), starring Rajesh Khanna - (India)
Be-Imaan - (India)
Ben, starring Lee Montgomery
The Big Bird Cage, starring Pam Grier
The Bitter Tears of Petra von Kant (Die Bitteren Tränen der Petra von Kant), directed by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, starring Hanna Schygulla - (West Germany)
Blacula, starring William Marshall and Vonetta McGee
Blanche, directed by Walerian Borowczyk, starring Michel Simon, Georges Wilson, Jacques Perrin, Ligia Branice - (France)
Bluebeard, directed by Edward Dmytryk, starring Richard Burton, Joey Heatherton, Raquel Welch, Virna Lisi, Sybil Danning
Bone, starring Yaphet Kotto
Boxcar Bertha, directed by Martin Scorsese, starring Barbara Hershey and David Carradine
The Boy Turns Man (Momcheto si otiva), directed by Lyudmil Kirkov, starring Nevena Kokanova, Kiril Gospodinov, Sashka Bratanova - (Bulgaria)
Brother Sun, Sister Moon (Fratello Sole, Sorella Luna), directed by Franco Zeffirelli - (Italy/U.K.)
Buck and the Preacher, directed by and starring Sidney Poitier, with Harry Belafonte and Ruby Dee
Butterflies Are Free, starring Goldie Hawn, Edward Albert, Eileen Heckart (Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress)
C
Cabaret, directed by Bob Fosse, starring Liza Minnelli, Michael York, Joel Grey - 8 Academy Awards, including Best Director, Best Actress and Best Supporting Actor
The Candidate, directed by Michael Ritchie, starring Robert Redford, Peter Boyle, Melvyn Douglas
The Canterbury Tales (I racconti di Canterbury), by Pier Paolo Pasolini, starring Hugh Griffith - Golden Bear winner - (Italy)
The Carey Treatment, directed by Blake Edwards, starring James Coburn and Jennifer O'Neill
Carry On Matron, starring Sid James, Kenneth Williams, Hattie Jacques - (U.K.)
The Castle of Purity (El castillo de la pureza) - (Mexico)
Cats' Play (Macskajáték) - (Hungary)
Chato's Land, starring Charles Bronson, Jack Palance, James Whitmore, Richard Basehart, Ralph Waite
Child's Play, directed by Sidney Lumet, starring James Mason, Robert Preston, Beau Bridges
Cheongchun gyosa (The Young Teacher) - (South Korea)
Chloe in the Afternoon (L'Amour l'après-midi), directed by Éric Rohmer, starring Zouzou - (France)
Cisco Pike, starring Kris Kristofferson, Karen Black, Gene Hackman
Come Back, Charleston Blue, starring Godfrey Cambridge and Raymond St. Jacques
Conquest of the Planet of the Apes, starring Roddy McDowall, Ricardo Montalbán, Natalie Trundy, Don Murray
Corky, starring Robert Blake and Charlotte Rampling
The Cowboys, directed by Mark Rydell, starring John Wayne, Roscoe Lee Browne, Bruce Dern
Cries and Whispers (Viskningar och rop), directed by Ingmar Bergman, starring Harriet Andersson, Ingrid Thulin, Liv Ullmann - (Sweden)
The Cruel Sea (Bas ya Bahar) - (Kuwait)
The Culpepper Cattle Co., directed by Dick Richards, starring Gary Grimes
Cu mâinile curate (With Clean Hands) - (Romania)
D
Daigoro vs. Goliath - (Japan)
Daughters of Satan, starring Tom Selleck
The Dawns Here Are Quiet (A zori zdes tikhie) - (U.S.S.R.)
A Day in the Death of Joe Egg, starring Alan Bates - (U.K.)
Days of '36, directed by Theodoros Angelopoulos
The Dagger - drama romance film directed by Fereydun Gole (Iran)
Deep Throat, - adult film directed by Gerard Damiano
Deliverance, directed by John Boorman, starring Jon Voight, Burt Reynolds, Ned Beatty, Ronny Cox
Dirty Little Billy, starring Michael J. Pollard
The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie, directed by Luis Buñuel, starring Fernando Rey, Delphine Seyrig, Stephane Audran - Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film - (France)
Don't Torture a Duckling (Non si sevizia un paperino) - (Italy)
Dr. Jekyll y el Hombre Lobo (Dr. Jekyll and the Wolfman), starring Paul Naschy - (Spain)
Dr. Phibes Rises Again, starring Vincent Price and Robert Quarry - (U.K.)
Dynamite Chicken, starring Richard Pryor
E
Eagle in a Cage, starring John Gielgud, Ralph Richardson, Billie Whitelaw, Kenneth Haigh
The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds, directed by Paul Newman, starring Joanne Woodward
Endless Night, directed by Sidney Gilliat, starring Hayley Mills, Hywel Bennett, Britt Ekland - (U.K.)
The Erotic Adventures of Zorro
Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask), directed by and starring Woody Allen, with Gene Wilder, Lynn Redgrave, Louise Lasser, Lou Jacobi, Heather MacRae, Tony Randall, Burt Reynolds
F
Fat City, directed by John Huston, starring Stacy Keach, Jeff Bridges, Susan Tyrrell
Fata Morgana, directed by Werner Herzog - (West Germany)
Fear in the Night, starring Judy Geeson, Ralph Bates, Peter Cushing and Joan Collins- (U.K.)
Fellini's Roma, directed by Federico Fellini - (Italy)
Fillmore, a music documentary film featuring Santana, Grateful Dead, Jefferson Airplane
The Final Comedown, starring Billy Dee Williams
Fist of Fury (Jīng Wǔ Mén), starring Bruce Lee - (Hong Kong)
Un flic (A Cop), directed by Jean-Pierre Melville, starring Alain Delon and Catherine Deneuve - (France)
Follow Me!, starring Mia Farrow
Frenzy, directed by Alfred Hitchcock, starring Jon Finch, Alec McCowen, Barry Foster, Anna Massey - (U.K.)
Fritz the Cat, directed by Ralph Bakshi — first animated movie to receive an X rating
Frogs, directed by George McCowan, starring Ray Milland, Sam Elliott, Joan Van Ark
Fuzz, starring Burt Reynolds, Yul Brynner and Raquel Welch
G
Game of Death, starring Bruce Lee and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar - (Hong Kong/U.S.A.)
Ganga Zumba
Gentlemen of Fortune (Dzhentlmeny udachi) - (U.S.S.R.)
The Getaway, directed by Sam Peckinpah, starring Steve McQueen, Ali MacGraw, Ben Johnson, Al Lettieri, Sally Struthers, Jack Dodson, Slim Pickens
The Girl on the Broomstick (Dívka na koštěti) - (Czechoslovakia)
Glastonbury Fayre, directed by Nicolas Roeg and Peter Neal, featuring Family, Fairport Convention, Traffic and more - (U.K.)
The Goalkeeper's Fear of the Penalty (Die Angst des Tormanns beim Elfmeter), directed by Wim Wenders - (West Germany)
The Goat Horn (Koziyat rog) - (Bulgaria)
The Godfather, directed by Francis Ford Coppola, starring Marlon Brando, Al Pacino, James Caan, Diane Keaton, Robert Duvall, John Cazale, Richard Castellano, Talia Shire, Gianni Russo, Richard Conte, John Marley, Alex Rocco, Al Lettieri, Sterling Hayden -- Academy Awards for best picture and best actor
Godzilla vs. Gigan, directed by Jun Fukuda - (Japan)
The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid, starring Cliff Robertson and Robert Duvall
The Groundstar Conspiracy, starring George Peppard
H
Hammersmith Is Out, directed by and starring Peter Ustinov, with Elizabeth Taylor, Richard Burton, Beau Bridges
The Harder They Come, starring Jimmy Cliff - (Jamaica)
The Heartbreak Kid, directed by Elaine May, starring Charles Grodin, Jeannie Berlin, Cybill Shepherd, Eddie Albert
Hellé, directed by Roger Vadim - (France)
Henry VIII and His Six Wives, starring Keith Michell, Charlotte Rampling, Jane Asher - (U.K.)
Her Third (Der Dritte) - (East Germany)
Hickey & Boggs, starring Robert Culp and Bill Cosby
Hit Man, starring Bernie Casey and Pam Grier
The Hot Rock, directed by Peter Yates, starring Robert Redford, George Segal, Ron Leibman, Zero Mostel
I
Images, directed by Robert Altman, starring Susannah York - (U.S.A./U.K.)
Intimate Confessions of a Chinese Courtesan (Ai Nu) - (Hong Kong)
Insect Woman (Chungnyeo) - (South Korea)
J
J. W. Coop, starring Cliff Robertson
João and the Knife (João e a faca) - (Brazil)
Jeremiah Johnson, directed by Sydney Pollack, starring Robert Redford
Joe Kidd, directed by John Sturges, starring Clint Eastwood, Robert Duvall, John Saxon
Junior Bonner, directed by Sam Peckinpah, starring Steve McQueen, Robert Preston, Ida Lupino, Joe Don Baker
K
Kansas City Bomber, starring Raquel Welch
The King of Marvin Gardens, directed by Bob Rafelson, starring Jack Nicholson, Bruce Dern, Ellen Burstyn
Koshish, starring Sanjeev Kumar - (India)
L
Lady Caroline Lamb, directed by Robert Bolt, starring Sarah Miles, Richard Chamberlain, Laurence Olivier - (U.K.)
Lady Liberty (La Mortadella), starring Sophia Loren and William Devane - (Italy)
Lady Sings the Blues, biopic of Billie Holiday, directed by Sidney J. Furie, starring Diana Ross, Billy Dee Williams, Richard Pryor
The Last House on the Left, directed by Wes Craven, starring Sandra Cassel, Lucy Grantham, David A. Hess
Last Tango in Paris (Ultimo tango a Parigi), directed by Bernardo Bertolucci, starring Marlon Brando and Maria Schneider - (France/Italy)
The Legend of Nigger Charley, starring Fred Williamson
The Life and Times of Judge Roy Bean, directed by John Huston, starring Paul Newman, Anthony Perkins, Ava Gardner, Roddy McDowall, Victoria Principal
Limbo, directed by Mark Robson, starring Kate Jackson
Lone Wolf and Cub: Sword of Vengeance (Kozure Ōkami: Kowokashi udekashi tsukamatsuru) - (Japan)
Los Amigos (a.k.a. Deaf Smith & Johnny Ears), starring Anthony Quinn and Franco Nero - (Italy/U.S.)
Ludwig, directed by Luchino Visconti, starring Helmut Berger, Trevor Howard, Silvana Mangano - (Italy/France)
Ludwig: Requiem for a Virgin King, directed by Hans-Jürgen Syberberg, starring Harry Baer – (West Germany)
M
The Man, TV movie written by Rod Serling, starring James Earl Jones, Burgess Meredith, William Windom, Georg Stanford Brown, Jack Benny
Man of La Mancha, starring Peter O'Toole, Sophia Loren, James Coco - (U.S./Italy)
The Man Who Quit Smoking (Mannen som slutade röka) - (Sweden)
Manhunt (La mala ordina), starring Henry Silva - (Italy)
The Master Touch starring Kirk Douglas- (Italy)
The Mattei Affair, directed by Francesco Rosi, starring Gian Maria Volontè - Palme d'Or winner - (Italy)
The Mechanic, starring Charles Bronson
Mehdi in Black and Hot Mini Pants, starring Naser Malek Motiee and Hamideh Kheirabadi (Iran)
Metzitzim (Peeping Toms) - (Israel)
Moon of the Wolf, starring David Janssen and Bradford Dillman
Mutiny on the Buses, starring Reg Varney - (U.K.)
My Dearest señorita (Mi querida señorita) - (Spain)
My Name Is Shanghai Joe, starring Klaus Kinski and Chen Lee - (Italy)
N
Napoleon and Samantha, starring Michael Douglas and Jodie Foster
The New Centurions, starring George C. Scott and Stacy Keach
The New Land (Nybyggarna), directed by Jan Troell, starring Max von Sydow and Liv Ullmann - Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Film – (Sweden)
Nidhanaya (The Treasure) - (Sri Lanka)
Night of the Lepus, starring Janet Leigh, Stuart Whitman, Rory Calhoun, Deforest Kelley
The Night Stalker, TV movie starring Darren McGavin, Simon Oakland, Carol Lynley, Claude Akins. Ralph Meeker, Kent Smith, Charles McGraw, Larry Linville, Barry Atwater
Now You See Him, Now You Don't, starring Kurt Russell
O
The Offence, directed by Sidney Lumet, starring Sean Connery and Trevor Howard - (U.K./U.S.A.)
One Is a Lonely Number, starring Trish Van Devere
The Other, starring Diana Muldaur
The Other Side of the Underneath, starring Sheila Allen - (U.K.)
The Outside Man (Un homme est mort), starring Jean-Louis Trintignant, Ann-Margret, Angie Dickinson - (France)
Oyster Village (Seokhwachon) - (South Korea)
P
Pancho Villa, starring Telly Savalas, Clint Walker, Chuck Connors, Anne Francis
Pearl in the Crown (Perła w koronie) - (Poland)
Pete 'n' Tillie, directed by Martin Ritt, starring Walter Matthau and Carol Burnett
Pink Flamingos, directed by John Waters, starring Divine
Pink Floyd: Live at Pompeii, directed by Adrian Maben, starring Roger Waters, David Gilmour, Richard Wright, Nick Mason
Play It Again, Sam, directed by Herbert Ross, starring Woody Allen, Diane Keaton, Tony Roberts
Play It as It Lays, directed by Frank Perry, starring Tuesday Weld and Anthony Perkins
Pocket Money, directed by Stuart Rosenberg, starring Paul Newman and Lee Marvin
Pope Joan, starring Liv Ullmann, Olivia de Havilland, Franco Nero
The Poseidon Adventure, directed by Ronald Neame, starring Gene Hackman, Ernest Borgnine, Red Buttons, Carol Lynley, Stella Stevens, Shelley Winters, Jack Albertson, Pamela Sue Martin, Roddy McDowall, Leslie Nielsen
The Possession of Joel Delaney, starring Shirley MacLaine and Perry King
Prime Cut, starring Lee Marvin and Gene Hackman
Private Parts, directed by Paul Bartel
Pulp, starring Michael Caine - (U.K.)
R
Rage, starring George C. Scott and Martin Sheen
Raja Jani, starring Dharmendra - (India)
A Reason to Live, a Reason to Die, starring James Coburn and Telly Savalas - (Italy)
Red Psalm (Még kér a nép), directed by Miklós Jancsó - (Hungary)
The Revengers, starring William Holden and Ernest Borgnine
The Rowdyman, starring Gordon Pinsent - (Canada)
The Ruling Class, starring Peter O'Toole and Alastair Sim - (U.K.)
S
The Salzburg Connection, starring Barry Newman, Anna Karina, Klaus Maria Brandauer
Savage Messiah, directed by Ken Russell - (U.K.)
Sbatti il mostro in prima pagina (Slam the Monster on the Frontpage), starring Gian Maria Volontè - (Italy)
The Scientific Cardplayer (Lo Scopone Scientifico), starring Bette Davis, Alberto Sordi and Silvana Mangano - (Italy)
The Seduction of Mimi (Mimí metallurgico ferito nell'onore), starring Mariangela Melato - (Italy)
Shaft's Big Score, starring Richard Roundtree and Moses Gunn
Silent Running, starring Bruce Dern
Sitting Target, starring Oliver Reed, Ian McShane and Jill St. John - (U.K.)
Skyjacked, starring Charlton Heston, Yvette Mimieux, James Brolin, Jeanne Crain, Walter Pidgeon
Slaughter, starring Jim Brown, Stella Stevens, Rip Torn
Slaughterhouse-Five, directed by George Roy Hill, starring Michael Sacks, Ron Leibman, Valerie Perrine
Sleuth, directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz, starring Laurence Olivier and Michael Caine - (U.S.A./(U.K.)
Snoopy, Come Home
Solaris, directed by Andrei Tarkovsky, starring Natalya Bondarchuk - (U.S.S.R.)
Something to Hide, starring Peter Finch and Shelley Winters
Sounder, directed by Martin Ritt, starring Cicely Tyson and Paul Winfield
State of Siege (État de Siège), directed by Costa-Gavras, starring Yves Montand - (France)
Steptoe and Son, starred Wilfrid Brambell and Harry H. Corbett - (U.K.)
Stigma, directed by David E. Durston, starring Philip Michael Thomas
Street Mobster (Gendai yakuza: hito-kiri yota) - (Japan)
Super Fly, directed by Gordon Parks, Jr., starring Ron O'Neal
T
Tabi no Omosa (Journey into Solitude) - (Japan)
Tales from the Crypt, starring Peter Cushing and Joan Collins - (U.K.)
The Tall Blond Man with One Black Shoe (Le Grand Blond avec une chaussure noire) - (France)
Taming of the Fire (Ukroshcheniye ognya) - (U.S.S.R.)
They Only Kill Their Masters, starring James Garner and Katharine Ross
The Thing with Two Heads, starring Ray Milland and Rosey Grier
To Find a Man, starring Pamela Sue Martin, Tom Bosley, Tom Ewell, Phyllis Newman
Tomorrow, starring Robert Duvall
Tonta, tonta, pero no tanto (Foolish, Foolish, but not that Much) - (Mexico)
Tout Va Bien (Everything's Fine), directed by Jean-Luc Godard, starring Jane Fonda and Yves Montand - (France/Italy)
Travels with My Aunt, starring Maggie Smith
Treasure Island, starring Orson Welles - (France/Germany/Spain/USA)
Trick Baby, starring Kiel Martin and Mel Stewart
The Triple Echo, directed by Michael Apted, starring Glenda Jackson and Oliver Reed - (U.K.)
Trouble Man, directed by Ivan Dixon, starring Robert Hooks and Paul Winfield
U
Ulzana's Raid, directed by Robert Aldrich, starring Burt Lancaster
Under Milk Wood, starring Richard Burton, Elizabeth Taylor, Peter O'Toole - (U.K.)
Under the Flag of the Rising Sun (Gunki hatameku moto ni) - (Japan)
Une belle fille comme moi (a.k.a. Such a Gorgeous Kid Like Me), directed by François Truffaut - (France)
V
The Valachi Papers, starring Charles Bronson and Lino Ventura - (Italy/France)
La Vallée, directed by Barbet Schroeder, starring Bulle Ogier with music by Pink Floyd - (France)
Vampire Circus, starring Adrienne Corri and Anthony Higgins - (U.K.)
Victoria No. 203 - (India)
The Visitors, directed by Elia Kazan
W
The War Between Men and Women starring Jack Lemmon and Barbara Harris
The Water Margin (Shui hu zhuan), directed by Chang Cheh - (Hong Kong)
Way of the Dragon (Meng long guo jiang), directed by and starring Bruce Lee with Nora Miao and Chuck Norris - (Hong Kong)
We Won't Grow Old Together (Nous ne vieillirons pas ensemble) - (France)
The Wedding (Wesele), directed by Andrzej Wajda - (Poland)
What's Up, Doc?, directed by Peter Bogdanovich, starring Barbra Streisand and Ryan O'Neal
When the Gods Fall Asleep (Quando os Deuses Adormecem) - (Brazil)
Where Does It Hurt? starring Peter Sellers
Winter Soldier, a documentary made by Vietnam Veterans Against the War
The Wrath of God, starring Robert Mitchum, Rita Hayworth, Frank Langella
XYZ
X,Y, and Zee, aka Zee and Co., starring Elizabeth Taylor, Michael Caine, Susannah York
You'll Like My Mother, starring Patty Duke
Young Winston, biopic of Winston Churchill, directed by Richard Attenborough, starring Simon Ward, Robert Shaw, Anne Bancroft - (U.K.)
January 1 - Catherine McCormack, actress
January 11 - Amanda Peet, actress
January 15 - Kobe Tai (also known as Carla Scott), adult and mainstream actress
February 9 - Crispin Freeman, voice actor
March 13 - Common, actor
March 18 - Dane Cook, comedian
March 23 - Judith Godrèche, actress
March 31 - Alejandro Amenábar, Spanish director, writer and soundtrack composer
April 17 - Jennifer Garner, actress
April 29 - Derek Mears, actor and stuntman
May 2 - Dwayne Johnson, actor
May 28 - Chiara Mastroianni, actress
June 7 - Karl Urban, actor
June 19 - Robin Tunney, actress
June 28 - Alessandro Nivola, actor
July 5 - Gilles Lellouche, actor and director
July 29 - Wil Wheaton, actor
August 12 - Rebecca Gayheart, actress
August 15 - Ben Affleck, actor, director and writer
August 30 - Cameron Diaz, actress
September 8 - Giovanni Frezza, actor
September 27 - Gwyneth Paltrow, actress
October 17 - Eminem (also known as Marshall Mathers), rapper and actor
October 22 - Saffron Burrows, actress
November 1 - Jenny McCarthy, actress
November 6 - Rebecca Romijn, actress
November 7 - Jeremy and Jason London, actors
November 14 - Josh Duhamel, actor
December 7 - Jennifer Syme, entertainment industry employee (d. 2001)
December 15 - Stuart Townsend, actor
December 23 - Christian Potenza, actor/voice actor
December 29 - Jude Law, actor
January 1 - Maurice Chevalier, 83, French actor/cabaret singer, Gigi, In Search of the Castaways
January 8 - Wesley Ruggles, 82, American director, producer, I'm No Angel, Arizona
January 17 - Rochelle Hudson, 55, American actress, Rebel Without a Cause, Imitation of Life
January 24 - Jerome Cowan, 74, American actor, The Maltese Falcon, Miracle on 34th Street
February 2 - Jessie Royce Landis, 75, American actress, North by Northwest, To Catch a Thief
February 7 - Walter Lang, 75, American director, The King and I, The Little Princess
February 19 - John Grierson, 73, Scottish director, producer, The Song of Ceylon, The Brave Don't Cry
March 20 - Marilyn Maxwell, 51, American actress, Champion, The Lemon Drop Kid
April 5
Brian Donlevy, 71, Irish actor, Kiss of Death, Wake Island
Isabel Jewell, 64, American actress, Gone with the Wind, Lost Horizon
April 25 - George Sanders, 65, British actor, All About Eve, Rebecca
April 30 - Gia Scala, 38, English-Italian actress, The Guns of Navarone, Don't Go Near the Water
May 3 - Bruce Cabot, 68, American actor, King Kong, Diamonds Are Forever
May 4 - Manny Ziener, 84, German actress
May 5 - Frank Tashlin, 59, American director, Son of Paleface, Artists and Models
May 13 - Dan Blocker, 43, American actor, Lady in Cement, Come Blow Your Horn
May 15 - Nigel Green, 47, South African actor, The Ipcress File, Zulu
May 21 - Margaret Rutherford, 80, English actress, Murder at the Gallop, Murder, She Said
July 3 - Hal Walker, 76, American director, Sailor Beware, At War with the Army
July 6 - Brandon deWilde, 30, American actor, Shane, Hud
July 28 - Helen Traubel, 73, American singer and actress, Deep in My Heart, The Ladies Man
August 7 - Joi Lansing, 43, American actress, Touch of Evil, A Hole in the Head
August 14 - Oscar Levant, 65, American actor, An American in Paris, The Band Wagon
September 12 - William Boyd, 77, American actor, Hopalong Cassidy film series
September 17 - Akim Tamiroff, 72, Russian actor, Ocean's 11, Touch of Evil
September 30 - Edgar G. Ulmer, 68, Czech-Austrian director, The Black Cat, Detour
October 4 - Colin Gordon, 61, British actor, The Pink Panther
October 9 - Miriam Hopkins, 69, American actress, Trouble in Paradise, Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde
October 16 - Leo G. Carroll, 85, English actor, North by Northwest, Strangers on a Train
October 22 - Jack Melford, 73, English actor, A Shot in the Dark, Lust for a Vampire
October 24 - Claire Windsor, 80, American actress, The Blot, Captain Lash
November 5 - Reginald Owen, 85, English actor, Mary Poppins, A Christmas Carol
November 16 - Vera Karalli, 83, Russian actress, ballerina
November 23 - Marie Wilson, 56, American actress, Mr. Hobbs Takes a Vacation, My Friend Irma Goes West
December 6 - Janet Munro, 38, British actress, Swiss Family Robinson, Darby O'Gill and the Little People
December 9
Louella Parsons, 91, Hollywood columnist
William Dieterle, 79, German director, The Life of Emile Zola, The Story of Louis Pasteur
Ned Beatty - Deliverance
Jerry Bruckheimer - The Culpepper Cattle Co.
Blythe Danner - To Kill a Clown
Jodie Foster - Napoleon and Samantha
Bob Hoskins - Up the Front
Isabelle Huppert - Faustine et la bel été
Samuel L. Jackson - Together for Days
Madeline Kahn - What's Up, Doc?
Ben Kingsley - Fear Is the Key
John Lithgow - Dealing: or the Berkeley-to-Boston Forty-Brick Lost-Bag Blues
Steve Martin - Another Nice Mess
Nick Nolte - Dirty Little Billy
James Woods - The Visitors
