Mickey's House of Villains is a 2002 direct-to-video animated movie produced by The Walt Disney Company (Walt Disney Television Animation and Toon City Animation, and animation was coordination by Walt Disney Feature Animation Florida). It is a film adaptation based on the Disney Channel animated television series Disney's House of Mouse and a sequel to the direct-to-video animated film Mickey's Magical Christmas: Snowed in at the House of Mouse, starring Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Minnie Mouse, Goofy, Daisy Duck and Disney Villains that have appeared in past Disney productions. It was released on both VHS and DVD by Walt Disney Home Video on September 3, 2002. It was followed by a 2004 direct-to-video animated film, Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers, produced by DisneyToon Studios, on August 17, 2004.
It is Halloween night at the House of Mouse, and a lot of villains are showing up. Jafar has a trick in store for the usual heroes of the House, but the villains have to wait until midnight for him to unleash it. After a series of cartoons, Jafar, along with his new henchmen Captain James Hook, Cruella de Vil, Ursula the Sea Witch and Hades, takes over the house with a musical number "It's Our House Now!" All the other villains soon join Jafar's plan. The heroes, princesses and other Disney characters are trapped in the kitchen while Mickey and several others are thrown out into the street. They witness the House's name being changed to the House of Villains.
Mickey, Donald, Goofy and Minnie try to take their House back, but Chernabog stops them from entering the building. After another two cartoons, Mickey dresses in his sorcerer outfit from Fantasia (and Fantasia 2000) and challenges Jafar to a magical duel using fireballs. Just when Mickey's sorcerer hat is knocked off, Aladdin escapes from the kitchen, flying on the magic carpet and gives Daisy Duck the magical lamp. Daisy hands it to Mickey who uses the lamp to suck Jafar into it. The rest of the villains run away and the House of Mouse is once again restored.
Wayne Allwine as Mickey Mouse
Russi Taylor as Minnie Mouse
Bill Farmer as Goofy / Pluto
Tony Anselmo as Donald Duck
Tress MacNeille as Daisy Duck / The Queen of Hearts / The Fates
Jonathan Freeman as Jafar
Gilbert Gottfried as Iago
Corey Burton as Captain Hook / Chernabog
Susanne Blakeslee as Cruella De Vil
Pat Carroll as Ursula
James Woods as Hades
Rob Paulsen as Hades (singing voice)
Bobcat Goldthwait as Pain
Matt Frewer as Panic
Jim Cummings as Pete / The Big Bad Wolf / Kaa / Ed / Tigger / Winnie the Pooh
Lois Nettleton as Maleficent
Like the show, the film shows several Disney cartoons. In fact, these shorts make up more of the movie than the actual plot with the villains. However, all their title cards are edited out.
Among them, three of the shorts are classic ones:
Lonesome Ghosts (1937)
Donald Duck and the Gorilla (1944)
Trick or Treat (1952)
The other five shorts were all originally broadcast on Mickey Mouse Works in 1999:
Mickey's Mechanical House
How to Haunt a House
Dance of the Goofys
Billy Joe as Goofy: Goofy's Dances, a Silly Symphonies of animated shorts Dance of the Goofys and provided to Jon Cooke, John Renard, and Aaron. Noel Cleary served as the supervising animator for Goofy.
Juan F. Lara as The Bad Boy: The Bad Boy is a little scientist but this appears to torture insects gather in the house of villains in the sketch of Goofy's Dances. Adam Murphy served as the supervising animator for The Bad Boy.
Donald's Halloween Scare
Hansel and Gretel
Classic Disney Cartoons: Peg Leg Pete, Lonesome Ghosts, Big Bad Wolf
Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs: The Wicked Queen / Old Hag
Pinocchio: Stromboli
Fantasia: Chernabog
The Adventures of Ichabod and Mr. Toad: Headless Horseman
Cinderella: Lady Tremaine, Drizella Tremaine & Lucifer
Alice in Wonderland: The Queen of Hearts, The King of Hearts & Card Soldiers
Peter Pan: Captain Hook, Mr. Smee, Pirate Crew & The Crocodile
Lady and the Tramp: Si and Am
Sleeping Beauty: Maleficent, Diablo & The Goons
One Hundred and One Dalmatians: Cruella de Vil & Horace and Jasper Badun
The Sword in the Stone: Madam Mim
The Jungle Book: Kaa
Robin Hood: Prince John
The Rescuers: Madame Medusa & Mr. Snoops
The Great Mouse Detective: Professor Ratigan & Fidget
The Little Mermaid: Ursula
Beauty and the Beast: Gaston & LeFou
Aladdin: Jafar (Leader) & Iago
The Lion King: Shenzi, Banzai and Ed
The Hunchback of Notre Dame: Judge Claude Frollo
Hercules: Hades, Pain and Panic & the Fates
Haunted Mansion: The Hitchhiking Ghosts
Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith Palpatine
