Martina Stoessel (born 21 March 1997) is an Argentine actress, model, singer, and dancer who gained international popularity for her debut role as Violetta Castillo on the Disney Channel Latin America original series, Violetta.
Stoessel was born in Buenos Aires and is the daughter of television producer and director Alejandro Stoessel and Mariana Muzlera. She has a brother who is one year older than her named Francisco. She began her artistic training at a young age studying singing, piano, musical comedy, musical theater, and dance in her native Buenos Aires. She was educated at two private bilingual schools: Colegio San Marcos and Colegio Martín y Omar de Isidro.
In 2007, she had a role in the first season of the popular Argentine children's telenovela, Patito Feo, as "Martina", one of Fito Bernardi's assistants. She also played the role of "Anna" in a flashback episode in the same series.
In 2011, she recorded in the Spanish version of the Shannon Saunders′ song, "The Glow", called "Tu Resplandor"; the song was included on the album, Disney Princess: Fairy Tale Songs. She performed the song at an event for Disney Channel Latin America called Celebratón, on 31 December 2011. The song was later released on an album for the series in March 2012.
Stoessel's father presented an unrelated project to Disney Channel producers, who later informed him about auditions for the lead role for the network's upcoming television series, Violetta. In late 2011, after an intense casting process, Stoessel obtained the principal role in the series, Violetta, a tween-oriented musical series launched as a co-production between Disney Channel Latin America, Europe, Middle East and Africa. The show's first season began production in Buenos Aires in 2012. Stoessel played the titular character, Violetta Castillo, during all 3 seasons of the show. Stoessel sang the series' theme song, "En mi mundo", which was later released as a single on 5 April 2012 to promote the show. Subsequently, she recorded the Italian version, "Nel mio mondo" and the English version, "In My Own World". Both songs were used as the theme songs for the series in its international broadcasts in Italy, the U.K., and the U.S. via Netflix. For this role she won an award for "Female Newcomer" in the 2012 edition of the Kids' Choice Awards Argentina and was also nominated for the U.S. version, the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards, in the "Favorite Latin Artist" category.
On 10 August 2013, Stoessel performed, along with the cast of Violetta, at the UNICEF charity event television Un sol para los chicos, where she sang the songs, "Ser mejor" and "En mi mundo". In 2013, she recorded "Libre soy" and "All'Alba sorgerò", the Spanish and Italian versions of "Let It Go", from the Disney animated film Frozen.
From 2012 to 2014, she participated in the recording of albums featuring music from all three seasons of Violetta. She also participated in the television programs The U-Mix Show and Disney Planet for Disney Latin America. In 2014, she voiced a small role for the Italian dubbed version of the film Monsters University. In May 2014, she released her first book, a co-authored biography called "Simplemente Tini", about on her upbringing and eventual rise to international popularity.
Stoessel and some of the cast members of Violetta filmed the movie, Tini: The Movie. The movie was filmed in between concert stops for the television series' final international tour. Production began on 7 October 2015 and ended in mid-December 2015, where the movie filmed in various international locations, including Sicily, Cádiz, Spain, Madrid, and Buenos Aires. A teaser trailer featuring scenes from the movie was released in late-December 2015. The film was released in various Latin American and European countries. It was to be released in Argentina on 14 July 2016, but was released earlier on 2 June 2016.
On 21 August 2015, it was announced that Stoessel had signed a recording deal with Hollywood Records to release her own solo material. From January 2016 to early March 2016 she recorded her debut album in Los Angeles, California. Her debut album, Tini, was released worldwide on digital and physical formats on 29 April 2016. The album contains two discs: one which serves as the soundtrack from "Tini: The Movie" and Stoessel's solo album of Spanish and English-language songs. Stoessel announced that "Siempre brillarás" would be the lead single used to promote the release of "Tini: The Movie". The song was available to fans on 25 March 2016 with the pre-order purchase of her debut album. The song was also recorded in English and was released under the title, "Born to Shine". The music video for "Siempre brillarás", featuring scenes from "Tini: The Movie", was released on 25 March 2016. The music video for the soundtrack's second promotional single, "Losing the Love", was released on 6 May 2016, and its music video included clips from the film. Stoessel performed songs from her debut album at her first showcase as a solo artist at La Usina del Arte in Buenos Aires on 12 June 2016.  On 24 June 2016, Stoessel released her first solo single, "Yo me escaparé", the Spanish-language version of the song, "Great Escape", which is not featured on her debut album. The music video for "Great Escape" was filmed in Buenos Aires and later released on 8 July 2016. 
Stoessel resides in San Isidro, Buenos Aires with her parents and brother. She is fluent in Spanish and English. From 2013 to 2015, Stoessel dated actor and singer Peter Lanzani.
Violetta en Vivo (2013–14)
Violetta Live (2015)
