The 21st Academy Awards features numerous firsts. It was the first time a non-Hollywood production won Best Picture, Hamlet. It was the first time an individual (Laurence Olivier) directed himself in an Oscar-winning performance.
John Huston directed two films in this awards year for which his actors won Oscars: his father, Walter Huston, in The Treasure of the Sierra Madre; and Claire Trevor for Key Largo. The Huston family won three Oscars that evening.
The ceremony was moved from the Shrine Auditorium to the Academy's own theater, primarily because the major Hollywood studios had withdrawn their financial support in order to address rumors that they had been trying to influence voters.
Humphrey Bogart failed to receive a nomination for Best Actor in The Treasure of the Sierra Madre, eventually considered one of the Academy’s greatest slights.
Joan of Arc became the first film to receive as many as seven nominations without being nominated for Best Picture. Hamlet became the fifth film to win Best Picture without a screenwriting nomination; the next to do so would be The Sound of Music at the 38th Academy Awards. Jane Wyman became the first performer since the silent era to win an Oscar for a performance with no lines; Johnny Belinda became the fourth film to receive nominations in all four acting categories.
Winners are listed first and highlighted in boldface.
Sid Grauman
Adolph Zukor
Walter Wanger
Monsieur Vincent (France)
Ivan Jandl
Jerry Wald
Class II
Victor Caccialanza, Maurice Ayers and the Paramount Studio Set Construction Department for the development and the application of "Paralite", a new lightweight plaster process for set construction
Nick Kalten, Louis J. Witt and the Twentieth Century-Fox Studio Mechanical Effects Department for a process of preserving and flame-proofing foliage
Class III
Marty Martin, Jack Lannon, Russell Shearman and the RKO Radio Studio Special Effects Department; A.J. Moran and the Warner Bros. Studio Electrical Department
Ethel Barrymore (Presenter: Best Picture)
Ann Blyth (Presenter: Best Sound Recording)
Frank Borzage (Presenter: Best Director)
Ronald Colman (Presenter: Best Actress)
Wendell Corey (Presenter: Best Film Editing)
Jeanne Crain (Presenter: Short Subject Awards)
Arlene Dahl (Presenter: Best Art Direction)
Glenn Ford (Presenter: Best Special Effects)
Ava Gardner (Presenter: Documentary Awards)
Kathryn Grayson (Presenter: Music Awards)
Edmund Gwenn (Presenter: Best Supporting Actress)
Jean Hersholt (Presenter: Honorary Awards)
Celeste Holm (Presenter: Best Supporting Actor)
Louis Jourdan (Presenter: Best Foreign Film)
Deborah Kerr (Presenter: Writing Awards)
George Murphy (Presenter: Scientific & Technical Awards)
Robert Ryan (Presenter: Best Cinematography)
Elizabeth Taylor (Presenter: Best Costume Design)
Loretta Young (Presenter: Best Actor)
Harry Babbitt and Gloria Wood ("The Woody Woodpecker Song")
Doris Day ("It's Magic" from Romance on the High Seas)
Gordon MacRae ("For Every Man There's a Woman" from Casbah)
Jane Russell ("Buttons and Bows" from The Paleface)
Jo Stafford ("This Is the Moment" from That Lady in Ermine)
6th Golden Globe Awards
1948 in film
1st Primetime Emmy Awards
2nd British Academy Film Awards
3rd Tony Awards
