Police Academy 6: City Under Siege is a 1989 comedy crime film starring Bubba Smith, David Graf and Michael Winslow. It was directed by Peter Bonerz and written by Stephen Curwick, based on characters created by Neal Israel and Pat Proft. The film was given a PG rating for violence and language. This was the last Police Academy sequel to be released in the year immediately following the previous installment of the series, as well as the last movie in the franchise to feature Bubba Smith, Marion Ramsey, Bruce Mahler, Lance Kinsey and George R. Robertson as Hightower, Hooks, Fackler, Proctor and Chief Hurst respectively.
The police must investigate a series of robberies along a strip of land in the city. The mayor (Kenneth Mars) assigns Captain Harris (G.W. Bailey) and Lt. Proctor (Lance Kinsey) to the case. While on stakeout the Wilson gang, composed of Ace (Gerrit Graham), Flash (Brian Seeman), and Ox (Darwyn Swalve), manages to slip through their fingers. The mayor wants Harris and Proctor to work with Commandant Lassard (George Gaynes) to apprehend the gang. Lassard assembles a seven-man team consisting of Hightower (Bubba Smith), Tackleberry (David Graf), Jones (Michael Winslow), Hooks (Marion Ramsey), Callahan (Leslie Easterbrook), Fackler (Bruce Mahler), and Lassard's nephew, Nick (Matt McCoy).
After distributing flyers as to the information of the Wilson gang and getting nowhere, Nick stumbles upon a paper reporting an antique diamond heading to a museum, and gets an idea to use it as bait: however the robbers nab the diamond anyway by cutting a hole in the truck and escaping through the sewer system. Nick then decides to go undercover to get information regarding a possible hideout, but Harris decides to go undercover to get a confession. Despite his fear of heights, Harris goes undercover as a window washer at a tall building and gets a confession of himself on tape after Proctor accidentally knocks him over the balcony.
The robberies are committed by a group of three dimwitted criminals who don't seem to be able to do this on their own, and it's revealed they are being guided by a shadow figure known as the "Mastermind," who speaks to the three behind a wall of glass and uses a voice distortion device. He devises a plan to get the cops out of the way.
Commandant Lassard and his men are later suspended after jewelry from the gang's last robbery is found in Lassard's office, pending an investigation. The gang decides to clear his name by nabbing the gang and the ringleader. Accessing data files from a computer, Nick deduces that the robberies are occurring along a bus route, thus intentionally lowering property values in that part of the city. They also learn that someone must be leaking information to the bad guys, which is why they are always one step ahead of the police.
The police academy force finds and does battle with the Wilson gang, taking down Ace, Flash, and Ox, while Nick chases the leader. A pursuit follows, which leads to Commissioner Hurst's (George Robertson) office. It's revealed that the mayor is the "Mastermind" and that Captain Harris has been unwittingly leaking information during his daily meetings with the mayor. Hurst apologizes and reinstates the force, and a plaque is given to honor the officers' bravery the next day. As the movie closes, Harris is sitting in a chair when a string tying the balloon float is cut, lifting his chair and floating him up into the air as he shouts Proctor's name.
Main Article: List of Police Academy characters
Matt McCoy as Sgt. Nick Lassard
Michael Winslow as Sgt Larvell Jones
David Graf as Sgt Eugene Tackleberry
Bubba Smith as Lt. Moses Hightower
Marion Ramsey as Sgt Laverne Hooks
Leslie Easterbrook as Lt. Debbie Callahan
George Gaynes as Cmdt. Eric Lassard
G. W. Bailey as Capt. Thaddeus Harris
Lance Kinsey as Lt. Proctor
George R. Robertson as Commissioner Henry Hurst
Bruce Mahler as Sgt. Douglas Fackler
Kenneth Mars as Mayor/Mastermind
Gerrit Graham as Ace
Brian Seeman as Flash
Darwyn Swalve as Ox
Sippy Whiddon as M.G.
Allison Mack as Little Girl
Arthur Batanides as Mr. Kirkland
Dean Norris as Cop
Some of the landmarks and people in the film reference the city of Toronto, the city where most of the first 4 Police Academy movies were filmed:
The police station is called Oakdale Police Station, referencing the Oakdale area of Toronto which a small area between the western intersections of Highway 400 and Finch Avenue, extending to just south of Sheppard Avenue, and east just past Jane Street. This is often referred to as part of the Downsview area of Toronto.
The criminal organization behind the crime wave in the city is called the Wilson Heights Gang, a reference to Wilson Heights Boulevard, a street in the Downsview area. The specific area itself is called Wilson Heights.
The movie was filmed entirely in Los Angeles, California.
Pete Hammond in Leonard Maltin's Movie Guide gave Police Academy 6 a BOMB rating, writing that "This entry is only—repeat only—for those who thought Police Academy 5 was robbed at Oscar time". The DVD/Video Guide by Mick Martin & Marsha Porter gave the first two Police Academy films 2 stars out of 5; and each subsequent film received a Turkey (their lowest score.)
The movie performed poorly at the US Box Office, opening on March 10, 1989 to an opening weekend gross of $4,032,480. It ultimately took in a low total of $11,567,217 and marked the decline of the Police Academy franchise. The film faced strong competition in early 1989 in United States theaters from such high-profile comedy releases as Honey, I Shrunk The Kids, Ghostbusters II, Major League, See No Evil, Hear No Evil, K-9, Three Fugitives, Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure, The 'Burbs, Fletch Lives, The Dream Team and Cousins.  It also earned the designation of being the first Police Academy movie not to place first in the US weekend box office.
The movie had a mostly negative response.
