The Corn Is Green is a 1945 drama film starring Bette Davis as a schoolteacher determined to bring education to a Welsh coal mining town, despite great opposition. It was adapted from the play of the same name by Emlyn Williams starring Ethel Barrymore.
John Dall and Joan Lorring were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress respectively.
Middle-aged Lily Cristobel Moffatt (Bette Davis) sets up a school in a Welsh coal mining town, despite the determined opposition of the local squire (Nigel Bruce). Eventually, she considers giving up. Then she discovers a promising student, Morgan Evans, a miner seemingly destined for a life of hard work and heavy drink. With renewed hope, she works hard to help him realise his potential.
Through diligence and perseverance, Morgan gets the opportunity to take an examination for Oxford University with, hopefully, a prized scholarship. Moffatt, the rest of the teachers, and their students are hopeful Morgan will pass the Oxford interview, and so he does.
However, Bessie Watty (Joan Lorring), a young woman who has recently given birth to Morgan's child, blackmails Moffatt for money to help raise the baby. The scheming young woman has designs on another male suitor. Finally, Moffatt agrees to adopt the child so that Morgan's academic future will not be ruined and Watty will be free to marry another man, unfettered by her responsibility to the child (since she and her affianced never really cared for it in the first place). Morgan quickly hears about Watty's scandalous, self-serving motives, and insists upon raising the child himself. Through a heartfelt and persuasive conversation, Moffatt convinces the young man to continue his higher education and contribute something to the world.
Bette Davis as Lily Cristobel Moffatt. The character was supposed to be in her 50s. To help her look the part, the thirty-six-year-old Davis wore a gray wig and a "fat suit" that added 30 pounds (14 kg).
Nigel Bruce as the Squire
John Dall as Morgan Evans. Richard Waring was originally cast for the part, but was drafted for World War II.
Rhys Williams as Mr. Jones
Rosalind Ivan as Mrs. Watty
Mildred Dunnock as Miss Ronberry
Arthur Shields as Glyn Thomas
Gwyneth Hughes as Sarah Pugh
Thomas Louden as Old Tom
Joan Lorring as Bessie Watty
