Scott Gordon-Patterson (born September 11, 1958) is an American actor. He is known for his role as Luke Danes in Gilmore Girls and Agent Strahm in Saw IV, Saw V and Saw VI. He also starred as Michael Buchanan in the NBC drama series The Event.
Patterson was born September 11, 1958, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the son of Hope Gordon, a homemaker, an actress in the Haddonfield Plays and Players Theatre Troupe and journalist, and Francis Ford Patterson IV, an advertising executive. His parents divorced in 1974. Patterson was raised in Haddonfield, New Jersey and attended Haddonfield Memorial High School. He attended Rutgers University, pursuing a degree in Comparative Literature. He studied acting in New York with renowned coaches Robert Lewis and Sondra Lee. He was exposed to the teachings of such luminaries as Paul Newman, Arthur Penn, and Frank Corsaro at The Actors Studio. At The Actor's Studio, he also participated in the Producer's Unit chaired by Arthur Penn. He appeared in numerous productions, including Rasputin and Miss Julie.
Patterson spent seven years, from 1980 to 1986, as a professional pitcher in minor league baseball, topping out at the Triple-A level (the highest before the major leagues). He played in two major league farm systems for seven different minor league teams and was selected to four All-Star Teams (two with Atlanta and two with the New York Yankees). He was placed on the New York Yankees Major League Roster in 1983. In the winter of 1985–86 he was selected by the Texas Rangers of the American League in the Rule 5 draft and placed on their Major League Roster. In 1981 Patterson won 13 consecutive games as a starting pitcher between class A Durham and class AA Savannah to set a Braves record for most consecutive wins to start a season. He was selected Braves Minor League Pitcher of the month 2 times and New York Yankees Pitcher of the Month once, and Pitcher of the Week 3 times. He was initially selected by the Atlanta Braves in the first round (12th overall pick) of the 1980 amateur entry draft. He played his first pro season with their Class A Anderson Braves in 1980, and his last with the New York Yankees' Double-A Albany-Colonie Yankees and Triple-A Columbus Clippers in 1986.
In 1982, Patterson was traded from the Braves to the Yankees for Bob Watson.
Patterson also pitched in the Puerto Rican Winter League (Arecibo Wolves, 1984-5) as a member of the New York Yankees, and the Dominican Republic Winter League (Santa Domingo, 1985-6), as a member of the Los Angeles Dodgers.
In 1988, Patterson formed the Arclight Theatre Company in Soho, NYC with John Bishop. Patterson played Jedediah Kohler in Bishop's 'The Great, Great Grandson of Jedediah Kohler' in the Company's debut production. One night, George Wolfe was in the audience and offered Gordon-Patterson a role in the European Traveling Company's 'Tamara', but he turned it down to continue work with Arclight.
Patterson was down to the wire on the Buffalo Bill role in 'Silence of the Lambs' that eventually went to Ted Levine. In 1991, Patterson nearly nabbed the role of Mr. Blonde in Quentin Tarantino's debut feature 'Reservoir Dogs'. After an arduous, month long auditioning process it was down to Patterson and Michael Madsen, with Madsen eventually getting the role.
In 1993, Patterson was slated to play the lead in Castle Rock's 'Little Big League' opposite Sela Ward. The producers recast the role at the last minute with 'Revenge of the Nerds' star Timothy Busfield, opting to offer Patterson the role of Mike McGrevey.
Patterson completed filming the leading role in the feature film Her Best Move, directed by Norm Hunter and co-starring Lisa Darr. He also appeared on the big screen in Little Big League, with Jason Robards, and in Three Wishes, with Patrick Swayze and Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio. He also starred in the independent films Highway 395 and Rhapsody in Bloom, with Penelope Ann Miller, Ron Silver, "The Boys of Abu Gahrib" (Sean Astin), and "Other People's Children" (Diane Marshall-Grant).
On television, he has landed romantic roles guest starring opposite some appealing leading women; his most notable role, which he played for seven years on the television show Gilmore Girls, is Luke Danes, the on-again, off-again love interest of the show's protagonist, Lorelai Gilmore, played by Lauren Graham.
On Seinfeld, Patterson was deemed "spongeworthy" by Elaine (Julia Louis-Dreyfus). He had a profound effect on Grace (Debra Messing) in the "Das Boob" episode of Will & Grace, and he played the love interests of Jennifer Grey in It's Like, You Know and Sharon Lawrence's character in Fired Up. He has also guest starred on Arli$$ and Get Real.
Among Patterson's recent projects are a co-starring role on Aliens in America and voicing the character of King Faraday in the 2004 animated series Justice League Unlimited, from Warner Bros. Animation. He has also starred as Agent Strahm in two iterations of the Saw franchise, Saw IV and Saw V respectively, also appearing through flashback sequences in Saw VI.
Patterson appeared in some episodes of the second season of 90210 as Liam Court's ex-con father who has recently been released from prison and wants to reconnect with his son.
Patterson starred as Michael Buchanan in the NBC drama series The Event, which premiered on September 20, 2010. His character was killed off in episode 18.
Patterson is producing Tyler Shields' second film, Outlaw, through his N O M E N C L A T U R E+ F I L M S. Outlaw stars Ana Mulvoy-Ten, Ali Cobrin (American Reunion), Ashley Bell (The Last Exorcism), Logan Huffman, and Conner Paolo. Production began September 30, 2013 in Los Angeles and Palm Springs.
