The Michael J. Fox Show is an American television sitcom starring Michael J. Fox. The series aired on NBC in the United States from September 26, 2013, to January 23, 2014, as part of the 2013–14 American television season. Fox made his regular return to television for the first time since he was on ABC's Spin City. It was his second NBC series, as he appeared on that network's sitcom Family Ties from 1982 to 1989 as Alex P. Keaton.
On February 5, 2014, it was announced that The Michael J. Fox Show would not return after the 2014 Winter Olympics as planned. A representative for NBC later stated the show "it's not cancelled. We are looking for a place on the schedule after April 3." Despite this, the remaining episodes never aired in the U.S. and, on May 10, 2014, NBC officially canceled the show after one season.
After being diagnosed with Parkinson's disease, Mike Henry had to give up his career as a news anchor for New York's WNBC and focus on his health and his family. Four years later, Mike decides to get back to work and struggles between family and career.
Michael J. Fox as Michael "Mike" Henry
Betsy Brandt as Annie Henry, Mike's wife
Juliette Goglia as Eve Henry, Mike's and Annie's daughter
Conor Romero as Ian Henry, Mike's and Annie's elder son
Jack Gore as Graham Henry, Mike's and Annie's younger son
Katie Finneran as Leigh Henry, Mike's sister
Ana Nogueira as Kay Costa, Mike's assistant
Wendell Pierce as Harris Green, Mike's boss and best friend
Anne Heche as Susan Rodriguez-Jones, Mike's coworker
Jason Katims as Doug, Mike's coworker
Brooke Shields as Deborah, Ian's girlfriend
Craig Bierko as Bill, the Henrys' neighbor
David Furr as Andy, the Henrys' doorman
In August 2012, NBC gave a straight-to-series order for the series.
The show had a positive reception from critics, with many praising Michael J. Fox and Betsy Brandt's performances. It was called one of six new shows to keep an eye on of the 2013-14 television season by Entertainment Weekly. The New York Times found the show distinctly unfunny, remarking that something felt "off".
In Australia the series premiered in double episodes, each scoring the highest rated overnight subscription television figures of the night (77,000 and 73,000 respectively). However, successive episodes saw a significant drop in ratings.
On June 25, 2013, the series was honored, along with five others, with the Critics' Choice Television Award for Most Exciting New Series. Fox was nominated for a Golden Globe.
In Australia, the series premiered on Universal Channel on January 15, 2014.
