Ben 10: Omniverse is an American animated television series and the fourth installment of the Ben 10 franchise, which aired on Cartoon Network from September 22, 2012 to November 14, 2014, in the United States. Man of Action (group consisting of Duncan Rouleau, Joe Casey, Joe Kelly, and Steven T. Seagle) created the franchise.
The series was announced at Cartoon Network's Upfront in 2011. Concept art, described as an homage to the original Ben 10 series, designed by Derrick J. Wyatt (Transformers: Animated and Scooby-Doo! Mystery Incorporated) was first unveiled at the 2012 UK Toy Fair.
The series premiered on September 22, 2012, with a "sneak peek episode" that aired on August 1, 2012. A "sneak peek" of the series aired after "Ben 10 Week" (March 19, 2012 – March 24, 2012).
The series follows the adventures of sixteen-year-old Ben Tennyson, wielder of the Omnitrix, an extremely powerful watch-like device that allows Ben to change into a multitude of various aliens; each with their own special abilities and skills. The storylines alternate between that of eleven-year-old Ben (one year after the original series) and sixteen-year-old Ben (a few months after Ben 10: Ultimate Alien). After Gwen leaves for college and Kevin leaves to be closer to her, sixteen-year-old Ben gets a new partner, a rookie by-the-book alien plumber named Rook Blonko (surname first). On a mission to explore a secret underground alien city named Undertown, Ben explores the quirkier side of things in the alien underground and discovers that enemies from his past are looking for a rematch.
In "T.G.I.S.", it is revealed that the Ben 10 universe shares the same universe with The Secret Saturdays.
Yuri Lowenthal – Ben Tennyson (16-years-old), Feedback, XLR8, Albedo (Human form), AmpFibian, Kickin Hawk, The Worst, Walkatrout, Molestache, Pesky Dust (1st Time), Hervé, Upgrade, Lt. Steel, Sumo Slammer, N-8, Alien Kid
Bumper Robinson – Rook Blonko, Bloxx, Terraspin, Jury Rigg, Corvo, Ball Weevil, Doc Saturday, Punchinello, Crujo, Alan Albright, Parallelogram Vreedle
Paul Eiding – Max Tennyson, Liam, Eye Guy, Blukic, Zed, Hoodlum, Ultimate Spidermonkey
Dee Bradley Baker – Lodestar, Spidermonkey, Water Hazard, NRG, Clockwork, Chromastone, Nanomech, Swampfire, Big Chill, Crashhopper, Astrodactyl, Psyphon, Echo Echo, Wildvine, Caitliff, Hulex Colonel, Thirteen, Ultimate Echo Echo, the Worst, Wildmutt, Stinkfly, Acid Breath, Kraab, Slix Vigma
Eric Bauza – Diamondhead, Eatle, Grey Matter, Upchuck, Driba, Dr. Psychobos, Fistrick, Megawhatt, Articguana, Way Big, Albedo (Galvan form), Bellicus (of Alien X), Pax, Solid Plugg, Ripjaws, Lackno, Mechaneer, Trombipulor, Computrons, Rook Da, Thunderpig, Commander Raff, Cast Iron, Poltroon, Ultimate Albedo, Buzzshock, Ultimate Articguana, Plumber Jerry, Cooper Daniels
Corey Burton – Malware, Mr. Baumann, Brainstorm, Seebik, Fiskerton, V.V. Argost, Albedo Brainstorm, Kane North/Kangaroo Kommando
John DiMaggio – Armodrillo, Zombozo, Bubble Helmet, Four Arms, Rath, Humungousaur, Octagon Vreedle, Vulkanus, Bullfrag, Will Harangue, Ultimate Humungousaur, Tentacle Vendor, Atomix, Whampire, Judge Domstol, Centur Squarr
David Kaye – Khyber, Cannonbolt, Shocksquatch, Gravattack, Heatblast, Sunder, Frankenstrike, Mallice, Warlord Gar, Ultimate Gravattack, Thumbskull, Forever King Joseph Chadwick (2nd Time), Lord Transyl, Deefus Veeblepister, Unitaur, Slapstrike, Exo-Skull, Skurd
Rob Paulsen – Magister Patelliday, Rhomboid Vreedle, Ditto, Captain Kork, Tummy Head, Gorvan, Phil, Gutrot
Kevin Michael Richardson – Snare-oh, Blitzwolfer, Emperor Milleous, Cookmeister, Sir Morton, Plumber Dispatcher
Tara Strong – Ben Tennyson (11-years-old), Pakmar, Mazuma, Natalie Alvarez, Ben Tennyson of Dimension 23, Y-It, Molly Gunther, Brown Bag, Princess Attea, Lucy Mann, Pesky Dust (2nd Time), Albedo (11-year-old Ben form), ML-E (1st Time), ML-E's Mother, Duffy, Swift, Diamondhead Gwen
Charlie Adler – Professor Blarney T. Hokestar, Cow Alien, Chicken Alien, Collectimus, Proctor Servantis
Carlos Alazraqui – Rad Dudesman, Scout, Pyxi
Aziz Ansari – Billy Billions
René Auberjonois – Azmuth, Azmuth of Dimension 23, Intellectuary
Diedrich Bader – Simian
Ogie Banks – Zak Saturday
Jeff Bennett – Kundo
Steven Jay Blum – Vilgax, Hobble, Zs'Skayr, Ghostfreak, Professor Helena Xagliv, Bill Gacks, Adwaita, Pa Vreedle, Thaddeus J. Collins
Kimberly Brooks – Princess Looma, Serena (of Alien X), Madison, Rayona, Rook Bralla
Bettina Bush – Kai Green
Greg Cipes – Kevin Levin (12, 17 and 43 years old)
Jeffrey Combs – Kuphulu
Jim Cummings – Vexx, Hulex Colonel
Tim Curry – Forever King Joseph Chadwick (1st Time)
Diane Delano – Ma Vreedle
Michael Dorn – Dr. Viktor
Dave Fennoy – Tetrax Shard of Dimension 23
Michael Goldstrom – Benevelon
Jennifer Hale – Rojo, Suemongousaur
Mark Hamill – Maltruant
Jon Heder – Clyde Fife
Ashley Johnson – Gwen Tennyson (11, 16 and 42 years old), Margie, Wildvine Gwen, Cannonbolt Gwen, XLR8 Gwen
Tom Kenny – Bezel
Phil LaMarr – Jonesy
Juliet Landau – Helen Wheels, Magistrata
Beth Littleford – Sandra Tennyson, Isosceles Right Triangle Vreedle
Morgan Lofting – Fistina, Yetta
Vanessa Marshall – Drew Saturday
David McCallum – Paradox
Edie McClurg – Vera Tennyson
Christopher McDonald – Carl Nesmith/Captain Nemesis
Scott Menville – Jimmy Jones, Chrono Spanner/Kenny Tennyson
Kate Micucci – Luhley
Miguel Nájera – Wes Green
Judd Nelson – Ben 10,000, Eon
Khary Payton – Manny Armstrong, Hex
Vyvan Pham – Julie Yamamoto, Ship
Charles Phoenix – Charles Zenith
Tara Platt – Ester, ML-E (2nd Time), J-NE, Subdora, Jennifer Nocturne
Alexander Polinsky – Argit
Kevin Schon – OTTO
Dwight Schultz – Dr. Animo
Cree Summer – Frightwig
Tia Texada – Elena Validus
Alanna Ubach – Rook Shar, Rook Ben
Kari Wahlgren – Charmcaster, Viktoria
Wil Wheaton – Darkstar, Dante
April Winchell – Queen Voratia Rumbletum
Gwendoline Yeo – Nyancy Chan, Sheelane
Susan Blu – Casting and Voice Director
Sebastian Evans II – Composer
Charlotte Fullerton – Story Editor
Carlos Sanches – Re-Recording Mixer
Matt Wayne – Story Editor
Derrick J. Wyatt – Art Director and Lead Character Designer
Matt Youngberg – Supervising Producer
A toy line manufactured by Bandai was originally shown off at Toy Fairs around the world. A possible unintentional leak of official images of the line was released on the website of department store Kmart. Figures that were revealed at Toy Fairs such as Bloxx, Shocksquatch, 16-year-old Ben Tennyson, an 11-year old version of Ben, and Ben's sidekick Rook were listed on the website. The vehicle play-set, "Rook's Truck", has won an award for Best Action Figures/Accessories at the 2012 London Toy Fair. The Omnitrix Touch has a gray color instead of the white it features in the show.
A video game of the same name is developed by Vicious Cycle Studios for the Wii U, Wii, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and by 1st Playable Productions for the Nintendo 3DS and Nintendo DS. The action beat 'em up features 15 playable characters on DS and 3DS and 16 playable characters on the other systems. It also features a two-player co-op play. The game follows Ben and Rook in a battle to defeat a fierce villain, named Malware, who has evil plans of destroying the world.
Omniverse also spawned a second video game, which was developed by High Voltage Studios for the Wii U, Wii, Playstation 3, and Xbox 360 and by 1st Playable Productions for the Nintendo 3DS. This game takes place during the events of Frogs of War, where Ben must fight the Incursions to get back to Earth and stop Emperor Milleous, Attea, Dr. Psychobos, and the Way Bads.
