Blast from the Past is a 1999 American romantic comedy film based on a story and directed by Hugh Wilson, and starring Brendan Fraser, Alicia Silverstone, Christopher Walken, Sissy Spacek and Dave Foley.
In 1962, Dr. Calvin Webber (Christopher Walken), an eccentric scientist who, like so many people at the time, thinks that a nuclear war between the U.S. and the Soviet Union is imminent, has built a large, fully functional fallout shelter in his backyard deep underground. During the Cuban Missile Crisis, thinking the conflict could escalate, Calvin takes his pregnant wife Helen (Sissy Spacek) into the fallout shelter as a precaution. When a fighter jet flying over loses control, the pilot bails out and the plane crashes into their house, causing large explosion; Calvin, thinking the worst has happened, sets and activates the shelter's locks (designed not to open for 35 years). Everyone assumes the entire family was killed in the accident, as no one knew of Calvin's secret fallout shelter.
Calvin's wife Helen gives birth to a boy, whom they name Adam (Brendan Frasier). Adam grows up being taught and exposed to all culture up to 1962, such as watching reruns of The Honeymooners and listening to Perry Como and Dean Martin. When the locks open in 1999, Calvin is so shocked to see how the world has changed (believing it to be a post-apocalyptic wasteland populated by irradiated mutants), he decides the family must stay underground. However, their supplies are running out, and Calvin suddenly falls ill from the stress, so Adam must venture onto the surface to procure more. As he leaves the shelter for the first time, he meets a drunk named Melcher who had encountered Calvin in his radiation suit the previous night and mistook him for God after he burst through the floor of an abandoned pub using his elevator to the surface. Having built a shrine above the elevator shaft, Melcher now worships Calvin and the elevator, with Adam's words of encouragement to him being mistaken as affirmation of his new religion. As he marvels at the outside world, seeing many things for the first time (the sky, a little girl, and a negro), Adam eventually realizes, while purchasing supplies in bulk, that he has strayed too far from the pub containing the elevator to the fallout shelter and cannot remember his way back.
Adam meets Eve Rustikoff (Alicia Silverstone) when he tries to sell his father's classic baseball cards at a hobby shop. She stops the store owner from trying to buy the cards for much less than their collectible value and is immediately fired. Adam asks Eve to drive him to a Holiday Inn in exchange for a rare baseball card; she takes the card and leaves, but returns the next morning to give it back out of guilt. When Eve mentions that she must find a new job, Adam asks her to help him purchase supplies and, unaware of the value of money, immediately agrees to her request for $1,000 a week. He also asks Eve to help him find a wife from Pasadena, California (per his mother's advice), who is "not a mutant"; he uses the term literally, but she mistakes it as a euphemism for "bitch." Adam meets Eve's gay housemate and best friend, Troy (Dave Foley), who is amused by Adam's naiveté but offers advice and gives Adam a fashion makeover.
Eve and Troy take Adam to a swing-style nightclub to find him a wife. Adam immediately attracts the attention of several women, including Eve's flirtatious rival, Sophie (Carmen Moré). Eve becomes jealous and reconnects with her ex-boyfriend Cliff (Nathan Fillion), but leaves after Cliff goads Adam into an altercation, ultimately backing off as Adam demonstrates his skills in boxing (having trained every day with his dad). Troy later returns home alone, and explains to Eve that Adam went home with Sophie. Adam returns later, explaining that he politely rejected Sophie's advances, saying that he could only think about being with her. He and Eve kiss, but when Adam tells her the truth about his past and states that he wants to take her to be his wife "underground," she asks him to leave. The next morning, after successfull locating the pub containing the elevator—as well as a full congregation destitute people hanging onto Melcher's every word) Adam returns to Eve's house, where she is waiting with a team of mental health professionals to have him committed. He sadly cooperates at first, but escapes as they leave the house, asking that Eve and Troy collect his things for him and pay his hotel bill. Troy and Eve find toiletries and clothing manufactured in the early 1960s, as well as absurdly valuable stocks in companies like IBM, and realize that Adam was telling the truth. With Melcher and his cult helping with loading the supplies into the shelter, Calvin is prepared to seal him and his family inside once more, until Eve spots Adam standing outside of the abandoned pub, the two share an embrace as Adam takes her to meet his parents.
Calvin and Helen are impressed with Eve and agree to Adam's request for the two of them to set the lock timer for two months while they stay down there. During this time which time he and Eve use the money from selling the stocks to build his parents a new home in the country, identical to the home that was destroyed. They also use the money to help Melcher rebuild the old pub into a 50's themed night club after convincing him that Adam isn't God. When they are settled in, Adam lets Calvin know that the truth about the airplane crash. Calvin takes the news stoically, thrilled to hear of the fall of the Soviet Union, but telling Adam not to mention this to Helen. After Adam walks away he mutters "Commies..." to himself and begins measuring the space in the backyard, beginning work on a new fallout shelter.
Brendan Fraser as Adam Webber
Alicia Silverstone as Eve Rustikoff
Christopher Walken as Calvin Webber
Sissy Spacek as Helen Webber
Dave Foley as Troy
Joey Slotnick as Soda Jerk / "Archbishop" Melcher
Dale Raoul as Mom
Rex Linn as Dave
Nathan Fillion as Cliff
Jenifer Lewis as Dr. Nina Aron
Hugh Wilson as Levy
John F. Kennedy (uncredited, archive footage) as himself (reveals existence of Cuban missiles)
Fidel Castro (uncredited, archive footage) as himself
Nikita Khrushchev (uncredited, archive footage) as himself (shakes fist at the U.N.)
Cynthia Mace as Betty
Harry S. Murphy as Bob
Carmen Moré as Sophie
The film received mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film had an overall score of 58% of the comments positive based on 78 reviews. On Metacritic has a score of 48%. Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars saying "the movie is funny and entertaining in all the usual ways, yes, but I was grateful that it tried for more: that it was actually about something, that it had an original premise, that it used satire and irony and had sly undercurrents."
Blast from the Past opened in North American theaters on February 12, 1999 and took in $7,771,066 earning it 5th place at the box office for the weekend.
