Ryan James Eggold (born August 10, 1984) is an American actor. He is known for his roles as Ryan Matthews on the CW teen drama series 90210 and as Tom Keen on the NBC crime drama series The Blacklist.
Eggold was born in Lakewood, California, the son of Karen (née Benik) and James Frederick Eggold. Eggold graduated from Santa Margarita Catholic High School in 2002, where he participated in many school theater performances, and later from the University of Southern California's theater arts department in 2006.
In 2006, Eggold made his professional television debut by way of a guest appearance on the show Related. He made his film debut the same year in the short film Con: The Corruption of Helm. Besides his success as an actor, Eggold writes music, plays guitar and piano, and sings in the band Eleanor Avenue.
Eggold had recurring roles on CBS's The Young and the Restless, HBO's Entourage, Cartoon Network's Out of Jimmy's Head, ABC's Brothers & Sisters, and the UPN/CW series Veronica Mars, before obtaining his first series regular role on the FX's Dirt.
In addition to his work in television, Eggold made his professional stage debut in the 2006 Ahmanson Theatre/Center Theatre Group production Dead End, directed by Nick Martin, and has since appeared in productions of Leipzig, the LA Weekly Theater Award-winning production of Marat/Sade, and an original production titled Amy and Elliot which he wrote, directed, and starred in at the Stella Adler Theatre with Alexandra Breckenridge.
Eggold portrayed English teacher Ryan Matthews in 90210, the CW spin-off of FOX's Beverly Hills, 90210, despite the fact that he is less than one year older than several of the other actors who played his students. In January 2012, he played Mischa Barton's love interest in Mark Edwin Robinson's supernatural romance thriller Into the Dark. Since the fall of 2013, he has regularly appeared as Tom Keen, a main character on NBC's hit drama The Blacklist. In January 2015, Eggold appeared on the History Channel's three-night miniseries Sons of Liberty as Dr. Joseph Warren, a friend of Sam Adams and Paul Revere.
