Peter Joseph is an American independent filmmaker and activist. He is best known for the Zeitgeist film series, which he wrote, directed, narrated, scored, and produced. He is the founder of the related The Zeitgeist Movement. Other professional work includes directing the music video God Is Dead? for the band Black Sabbath
According to Joseph he was born in Winston-Salem, North Carolina and attended high school at the University of North Carolina School of the Arts. After graduation, he moved to New York City to pursue a career in solo classical percussion performance, attending the New School for Social Research.
Joseph began his professional career working in advertising and as a private equity trader on Wall Street. In 2007 he produced a live performance art piece in New York City that he entitled "Zeitgeist." A film version was created and released by Joseph online and went viral with millions of views. It became the first in a trilogy of films produced by Joseph, the others being Zeitgeist: Addendum and Zeitgeist: Moving Forward, released in 2008 and 2011 respectively.
In 2009, Joseph founded The Zeitgeist Movement, a self-described "sustainability advocacy organization." It was originally started as the "activist arm" of an organization called The Venus Project, launched by Jacque Fresco in 1994. In 2011 the two organizations separated. Joseph's work with the Movement and the Trilogy has been the subject of national media attention to include articles in the The New York Times, The Palm Beach Post, VC Reporter, and TheMarker.
Joseph is the owner of Gentle Machine Productions LLC, a production company that has released many of his projects, including the Zeitgeist film trilogy. It also is responsible for the production of the Culture in Decline, a web series launched by Joseph in 2012, as well as Joseph's new feature film project: InterReflections.
Peter Joseph directed a "short-film" music video for the heavy metal music group Black Sabbath, entitled "God Is Dead?" The film had its world-premiere screening at the band's June 6, 2013, album release in Hollywood's Harmony Gold Preview Center. The music video film is largely composed of symbolism extracted from Joseph's Zeitgeist trilogy, coupled with layers of imposed archival imagery of the band.
Joseph has given a number of lectures and interviews, including TEDx talks, a feature at the 2011 Cine Futuro film festival, a feature at the 2011 Leaders Causing Leaders conference, appearances on RT TV, the Joe Rogan podcast in 2012, The Young Turks, and the Marker TV in Israel. Major news media have done profiles of him, including the New York Times. He was a judge in the 2015 USFUCA Worldwide Youth Contest supporting youth generated technological progress and has been featured by The Global Summit. Joseph is also on the steering committee of Project Peace on Earth.
Joseph also works in support of the Occupy Movement. A proponent of Occupy Wall St, he gave public speeches in both New York and Los Angeles.
Post-scarcity economy
Technocracy
Occupy movement
