Kristine Sutherland (born Kristine Young on April 17, 1955 in Boise, Idaho) is an American actress best known for her frequent recurring role as Buffy Summers' mother Joyce Summers on the television show Buffy The Vampire Slayer , where she appeared in every season, and in her role as the mother in Honey, I Shrunk the Kids.
She was born Kristine Young, and changed her name because she was often confused with another similarly named actress. The last name "Sutherland" was after her cat, whom she named "Donald" after Donald Sutherland, who, coincidentally, had a role in the original Buffy the Vampire Slayer film, Joss Whedon's first attempt to bring Buffy to audiences. Hence she is not related to Donald Sutherland or his son Kiefer.
She attended high school in Lexington, Kentucky, where she participated in the Tates Creek Drama program. After graduating, she enrolled in the University of Kentucky.
Sutherland's first film role was as a secretary in Legal Eagles (1986). She appeared as Mae Thompson in the 1989 film Honey, I Shrunk the Kids. Her career received a big boost when she played Buffy's mother in the action-horror television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer, from 1997 to 2002. Creator Joss Whedon later stated that one of the reasons he chose Sutherland for the role was the fact that she exuded a warm demeanor, as well as what he believed to be a close resemblance to actress Sarah Michelle Gellar, who was to portray her daughter in the series. She appeared regularly on the show for the first five seasons before leaving, but returned for three more guest appearances, 1 in season 6 and 2 in season 7.
After leaving Buffy, Sutherland attended a photography course at the Santa Monica College and subsequently set up a studio specializing in portraits. In 2008, she appeared in the television miniseries Comanche Moon and had a guest role in an episode of New Amsterdam.
She voiced Haru's Mother in the English dub of The Cat Returns.
Sutherland is married to actor John Pankow, currently starring as "Merc Lapidus" on Showtime's Episodes. They have one daughter.
1986 Legal Eagles
1986 The Art of Being Nick
1989 Honey, I Shrunk the Kids
1997–2002: Buffy the Vampire Slayer
2002 The Cat Returns (voice, English dub)
2010-2011: One Life to Live
2012 The Perfect Wedding
2016 Are You Afraid of the 90s
