Medical Investigation was an American medical drama television series that began September 9, 2004, on NBC. It ran for 20 one-hour episodes before being cancelled in 2005. The series was co-produced by Paramount Network Television (now CBS Television Studios) and NBC Universal Television Studio (now Universal Television).
The series featured the cases of an elite team of medical experts of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) who investigate unusual public-health crises, such as sudden outbreaks of serious and mysterious diseases. In actuality, medical investigative duties in the United States are normally the responsibility of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and local health departments, while the NIH is primarily a disease-research and -theory organization.
In the UK, Five's digital channel Five USA showed the series daily at 6pm from the 2nd November 2009.
Neal McDonough plays Dr. Stephen Connor; the leader of the team whose medical career has separated him from his family. Connor was previously a Captain in the US Army, and fought in the Gulf War.
Kelli Williams plays Dr. Natalie Durant; an expert in pathology and epidemiology, who often questions Connor, although serving as the team's second-in-command.
Christopher Gorham plays Dr. Miles McCabe; the newest and youngest member of the team; frequently tries to prove his worth.
Anna Belknap plays Eva Rossi; the team's media liaison who prevents the team's investigations from causing public panic.
Troy Winbush plays Frank Powell; a highly skilled medical investigator who has been friends with Connor for sometime. Previously served in the US Navy.
 Australia - Network Ten
 Belgium - VT4
 Brazil - Warner Channel (cable) and SBT (free-to-air)
 Canada - Global TV (French: Series Plus)
 Croatia - Nova TV
 Czech - TV Nova
 Denmark - TV2
 Estonia - Kanal 2
 Finland - Nelonen
 France - M6, then W9, under the title "NIH : alertes médicales"
 Germany - ProSieben, reruns in 2009 at Kabel eins, reruns in 2010 at sixx
 Greece - Alpha TV
 Hungary - TV2 (Hungary)
 Ireland - Sci Fi
 Italy - Fox, RAI
 Japan - Fox
 Malaysia - STAR World and TV3
 Middle East - MBC Action
 Netherlands - SBS6, Veronica
 New Zealand - TV3
 Norway - TV2, TV2 Zebra
 Philippines - RPN 9, Star World
 Poland - TVN Siedem and AXN
 Portugal - Sony Entertainment Television
 Romania - TVR Seriale, AXN
 Macedonia - Local Televisions
 Slovakia - Markíza
 Spain - Telecinco
 Serbia - Zona Plus
 Sweden - TV4 Plus
 Turkey - MyMax
 United Kingdom - Channel 5 (UK), Sci Fi
 Ukraine - Inter
 USA - NBC
The USA Network began running reruns on January 6, 2005, in what is called a "repurposed" broadcast. It is, however, no different from the original broadcasts. High definition reruns of the show are being broadcast on the Universal HD channel. In January 2007 the series began airing on NBC Universal's mystery and crime-themed cable channel, Sleuth.
