American Dreamz is a 2006 comedy/parody film that satirizes both American politics and popular entertainment.
Director/producer/writer Paul Weitz has stated that the movie is meant to satirize both the TV show American Idol and the Bush Administration. Reviews were lukewarm and business was disappointing.
The roman à clef movie boasts characters who are parody versions of President George W. Bush, then-American Idol winner Kelly Clarkson, Vice President Dick Cheney, and television personality Simon Cowell.
On the morning after his re-election, US President Joseph Staton (Dennis Quaid) decides to read the newspaper for the first time in four years. This starts him down a slippery slope. He begins reading obsessively, reexamining his "black-and-white" view of the world in a more "gray-seeming" way, and holing up in his bedroom in his pajamas. Frightened by the President's apparent nervous breakdown, his Chief of Staff (Willem Dafoe) pushes him back into the spotlight, booking him as a guest judge on the television ratings juggernaut (and the President's personal favorite), the weekly talent show American Dreamz, a show similar in format to the modern-day American Idol. America cannot seem to get enough of American Dreamz, hosted by self-aggrandizing, self-loathing Martin Tweed (Hugh Grant), ever on the lookout for the next insta-celebrity. His latest crop of hopefuls includes Sally Kendoo (Mandy Moore), a conniving steel magnolia with a devoted, dopey veteran boyfriend William Williams (Chris Klein), and Omer Obeidi (Sam Golzari).
Because Omer's mother died in the Middle East in an American attack, he joined a group of jihadists. He was an actor in an instruction film for terrorists, but he was too clumsy, and his interest in show tunes was frowned upon. Therefore, he was sent to the U.S. to await further instructions, but the leaders expected they could not use him. He moved to Southern California to live with his extended family there, including his effeminate cousin Iqbal (Tony Yalda) and Shazzy (Noureen DeWulf). Iqbal hoped to be selected to participate in American Dreamz, but in a misunderstanding, Omer was selected instead. Iqbal becomes angered by this at first but later agrees to help Omer win and makes himself his manager.
Omer's terrorist organization now sees an opportunity: Omer is instructed to make it to the finale, and kill the President in a suicide attack. He succeeds in getting to the finale. Security is bypassed by assembling the bomb after the security check, in the toilet, from small parts smuggled in (the smaller pieces of explosive are disguised as chewing gum). Omer agrees, but changes his mind and disposes of the bomb in the trash can.
Sally is the other finalist. Earlier in the film, she had dumped William because she believed that her life would've gone nowhere if she still had him for a boyfriend and that he'd only drag her down. This drove William to join the army, only to be wounded in Iraq and sent back to the U.S. For the purpose of the show and at the insistence of her agent, Chet Krogl (Seth Meyers), Sally has to pretend that she still loves William. On the eve of the American Dreamz finale, William proposes to Sally, which she rejects until Chet decides to boost Sally's popularity and chances of winning the show by asking William to do the proposal on air. However, William witnesses Sally having sex with Martin, and is furious. When he throws out the engagement ring, he finds the bomb Omer tossed in the trash can. He then comes out on stage and threatens to detonate it. While the other people evacuate, William starts singing and Martin, who refuses to let go of the camera, films it. As William reaches the end of the song, he detonates the bomb by walking into the camera, killing both himself and Martin. The film then cuts to shots of people dialing up their cell phones to vote in for the winner. It is eventually revealed that William Williams was voted the surprise winner of American Dreamz.
The epilogue reveals what each of the characters went on to do after the end of last season. Omer went on to become a successful star of his own Broadway revue, where he is shown performing a scene from the musical Grease. The President makes his wife his new Chief of Staff. And Sally Kendoo becomes the new host of American Dreamz.
Hugh Grant as Martin "Tweedy" Tweed
Dennis Quaid as President Joseph Staton
Marcia Gay Harden as First Lady
Willem Dafoe as Chief of Staff
Mandy Moore as Sally Kendoo
Chris Klein as William Williams
Jennifer Coolidge as Martha Kendoo
Sam Golzari as Omer Obeidi
Seth Meyers as Chet Krogl
Judy Greer as Deborah Accordo
John Cho as Frank Ittles
Tony Yalda as Iqbal Riza
Noureen DeWulf as Shabnam "Shazzy" Riza
Shohreh Aghdashloo as Nazneen Riza
Adam Busch as Sholem Glickstein
Jeff Ross as American Dreamz finale pre-show announcer (uncredited)
American Dreamz opened on April 21, 2006 and made $3.7 million in its first weekend, placing ninth. The film had a total domestic gross of $7.2 million and an international gross of $9.2 million, for a total gross of $16.4 million. It had its widest release in its opening weekend, opening in 1,500 theatres across the USA, and ended its national release after only four weeks on May 28, 2006.
In the Netherlands, the film debuted at #7, dropping to #10 in its second week. As of June 14, 2006, the film has grossed a total of €92,432 in the Netherlands.
In Spain, the film debuted at #11, earning $109,681 in 50 theatres. The following week dropped to #15, grossing $58,467.
On the review website Rotten Tomatoes, 41% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 152 reviews, and an average rating of 5.2/10, with the consensus: "This overly silly satire aims at too many targets with arrows too dull to make relevant social commentary."
Coal Miner's Daughter — We can see the film's poster in Sally's bedroom.
As Good as It Gets — "You make me want to make myself a better person."
Grease — Omer is seen singing "Greased Lightnin'" at the end of the film.
Pimp My Ride — One of the top ten shows is called "Pimp My House".
Guys and Dolls — The film is mentioned and Omer sings "Luck Be a Lady".
Man of La Mancha — Omer sings "Impossible Dream".
A Chorus Line — Omer sings "One".
The film's soundtrack was released April 18, 2006 by Lakeshore Records.
"Stars and Stripes Forever"
"One" — Sam Golzari (from A Chorus Line)
"Luck Be a Lady" — Sam Golzari (from Guys and Dolls)
"Impossible Dream" — Sam Golzari (from Man of La Mancha)
"My Way" — Sam Golzari
"Greased Lightnin'" — Sam Golzari (from Grease)
"Super Freak" — Rick James
"That's Entertainment" — The Jam
"Nights in White Satin" — The Moody Blues
"Mommy Don't Drink Me to Bed Tonight" — Mandy Moore
"(Girl) Let's Not Be Friends" — Joshua Wade
"Rockin' Man" — Trey Parker
"Never Felt This Way Before" — Niki J. Crawford
"Lez Git Raunchy" — Adam Busch
"Dreams with a Z" — Mandy Moore
"Tea Time" — Joe Lervold
"Trail of Love" — The Razen Shadows feat. Teresa James
"Riza" — Pedro Eustache, Paul Livingstone, Faisal Zedan, Wael Kakish, and Donavon Lerman
American Dreamz was released on DVD in the United Kingdom on July 2, 2006, and was released in America on October 17, 2006. It was then released in Australia later that year.
