Cartoon Network Studios is an American animation studio. A subsidiary of the Turner Broadcasting System, Cartoon Network, and formerly of Hanna-Barbera Productions, Inc. (all subsidiaries of the Time Warner media conglomerate), the company focuses on producing and developing original animated programs and shorts for Cartoon Network, but sometimes also for its late-night block Adult Swim.
In a manner similar to Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Animation and Universal Animation Studios, the actual animation production is done overseas, most notably by either Saerom Animation or Rough Draft Studios, with pre-production and post-production being United States-based.
The studio began on October 21, 1994 at 7:00am as a name-only division of Hanna-Barbera Cartoons, Inc., which was then focused on producing Cartoon Cartoons for Cartoon Network: What a Cartoon!, Dexter's Laboratory, Johnny Bravo, and The Powerpuff Girls. In 1997, these series credited Cartoon Network Studios as Warner Bros. Animation's subsidiary Hanna-Barbera. In 1999, Cartoon Network Studios acquired its own facility located at 300 N 3rd St in Burbank, California, which was the location of a telephone communications equipment building. Construction and production of the actual company and its various shows and pilots commenced in late 2000.
After William Hanna died, the Hanna-Barbera name was dropped as a production entity and the Hanna-Barbera studio was folded into Warner Bros. Animation by its chief Jean MacCurdy. Cartoon Network Studios was then revived as a separate entity from Hanna-Barbera, growing out of the animation studio. Cartoon Network Studios has continued to steadily grow with productions such as The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy and Samurai Jack and newer productions such as Adventure Time, Regular Show, and Uncle Grandpa. Some of Cartoon Network Studios' former programming now rerun on Cartoon Network's sister channel, Boomerang.
All the films are theatrically distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures.
List of programs broadcast by Cartoon Network
Williams Street
Hanna-Barbera
Warner Bros. Animation
Cartoon Network Development Studio Europe, the European sister studio of the company.
Nickelodeon Animation Studio - the animation division of Nickelodeon, Nicktoons, and Nick Jr.
Disney Television Animation - the animation division of Disney Channel, Disney XD, and Disney Junior.
