Dee Wallace or Dee Wallace Stone (born Deanna Bowers on December 14, 1948) is an American actress. She is known for her scream queen roles in several popular films in the horror genre, including The Hills Have Eyes (1977), The Howling (1981) and Cujo (1983). Her most widely seen role is a starring role as Eliott's mother, Mary, in the Steven Spielberg film E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982). Her other film appearances include The Stepford Wives (1975), 10 (1979) and Critters (1986). She was nominated for the 2016 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Guest Performer in a Drama Series for her role on the ABC soap opera General Hospital.
Wallace was born Deanna Bowers in Kansas City, Kansas, the daughter of Maxine (née Nichols) and Robert Stanley Bowers. She attended Wyandotte High School before attending the University of Kansas and graduating with an education degree. She briefly taught high school drama at Washington High School in her native Kansas City in the early 1970s.
She was briefly married first to Barry Wallace and still uses his and her second husbands names in her career. This marriage ended in divorce.
She married fellow actor Christopher Stone in 1980, with whom she had one daughter, actor and filmmaker Gabrielle Stone. Christopher Stone died fifteen years later of a heart attack. Wallace married television producer Skip Belyea in 1998.
Aside from acting, Wallace is also a public speaker, and self-help author, having written three books, and has her own call-in radio show where she talks exclusively about the creation of the "self". Wallace often speaks about how you can get through tough times with determination and love. She has also written a book called Bright Light, about her life lessons from an acting career.Wallace had a stalker, Russell Robinson, who was arrested after following her to several personal appearances.
She appeared in the television series Together We Stand (1986–1987) and the syndicated The New Lassie (1989–1992). In the latter series, she appeared with her now late husband Christopher Stone, with whom she also co-starred in The Howling (1981) and Cujo (1983). She starred in Rob Zombie's re-imagining of Halloween, as Cynthia Strode, Laurie's adoptive mother.
In 2009, she played the role of Nancy Dooly, Vincent's mother in The Mother of Invention. She appeared in the horror film The Ocean, the western Between the Sand and the Sky and the horror-thriller Sebastian. The latter movie stars Daeg Faerch, Meadow Williams, Betsy Rue, Meg Foster and Greg Vaughan. She is also featured in the eighth season of The Office as the mother of Andy Bernard, in the episode "Garden Party". She also appeared on Grimm as Monroe's mother.
In March 2015, Wallace was cast on General Hospital as Patricia Spencer, the unseen, long-lost older sister of Luke and Bobbie Spencer. For this role, she was nominated for the 2016 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Guest Performer in a Drama Series.
