International Rome Film Festival is a film festival that takes place in Rome, Italy, during the month of October. The actual complete name in Italian is Festival Internazionale del Film di Roma.
Even though it is quite a young festival, the importance of the hosting city as well as the strong economic investment has placed the Rome Film Festival among the most important film festivals in the world, with huge media coverage and world-famous artists in attendance.
Besides, along with the festival, a film market called the Business Street is set up in the Via Veneto, well-known due to the classic La Dolce Vita (1960).
The Rome Film Festival official program is divided into several sections:
A selection of feature films of young or already successful directors. The Festival will give priority to feature films that are world premieres. At the end of each screening, the audience will give their vote and assign the People’s Choice Award | Cinema d'Oggi.
A selection of some of the year’s most important films. Only feature films that are world premieres, international or European premieres will be considered for selection. .
A selection of films belonging to different film genres. Only feature films that are world, international or European premieres will be considered for selection. The Festival will give priority to feature films that are world premieres.
This section aims to highlight the new trends in the Italian cinema. Only films presented as world premieres will be considered for selection. At the end of each screening, the audience will give their vote and assign the People’s Choice Award | Cinema Italia (Fiction) and the People’s Choice Award | Cinema Italia (Documentary).
Devoted to children films, this sections has two competitive subsections, one for over-12 films and the other under-12. Besides, a number of special events, meetings and more.
The Rome Film Festival award is a silver statuette shaped after the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius statue, placed in Michelangelo's Campidoglio Square, arguably one of the most recognizable symbols of Rome.
According to the great majority of the audience’s preferences the best feature film presented in the Gala section will receive the BNL People’s Choice Award | Gala, along with a prize money assigned to its Italian distributor. If within 6 months the film will not be bought by an Italian distributor, the prize money will be given to its international seller.
2014: Trash (Brazil, UK), directed by Stephen Daldry
According to the great majority of the audience’s preferences the best feature film presented in the Cinema d’Oggi section will receive the People’s Choice Award | Cinema d’Oggi.
2014: 12 Citizens (China), directed by Zu Ang
According to the great majority of the audience’s preferences the best feature film presented in the Mondo Genere section will receive the People’s Choice Award | Mondo Genere.
2014 : Haider (India), directed by Vishal Bhardwaj
According to the great majority of the audience’s preferences the best fiction feature will received the People’s Choice Award | Cinema Italia (Fiction).
2014: Fino a qui tutto bene, directed by Roan Johnson
According to the great majority of the audience’s preferences the best documentary feature will receive People’s Choice Award | Cinema Italia (Doc).
The 2014 Festival will pay particular attention to emerging cinema: the debut and second feature-length films included in all the sections (including both the Official Selection and the Independent and Parallel Sidebars) will compete for the TAODUE Camera d’Oro Prize for best debut or second work, awarded by a specific and prestigious jury.
The Artistic Director will also suggest to the Board of Directors the names of the recipients for the following Prizes: - the Marc’Aurelio Lifetime Achievement Award, celebrating the work of a master of the art of cinema; - the Maverick Director Award, for a filmmaker who has consistently broken new ground in cinema; - the Marc’Aurelio Acting Awards, for actors and actresses who have raised acting technique to the highest levels; - the Marc’Aurelio of the Future Award, to spotlight the international value of a young director.
Furthermore, the DOC.IT association will award a prize to the Best Italian Documentary.
2014: Looking for Kadija, directed by Francesco G. Raganato
2006: Playing the Victim BY Kirill Serebrennikov
2007: Juno BY Jason Reitman
2008: Opium War BY Siddiq Barmak
2009: Broderskab BY Nicolo Donato (film director)
2010: Kill Me Please BY Olias Barco
2011: Un cuento chino BY Sebastián Borensztein
2012: Marfa Girl BY Larry Clark
2013: Tir BY Alberto Fasulo
2006: Giorgio Colangeli (in Salty Air)
2007: Rade Šerbedžija (in Fugitive Pieces)
2008: Bohdan Stupka (in Serce na dloni)
2009: Sergio Castellitto (in Alza la testa)
2010: Toni Servillo (in Una vita tranquilla)
2011: Guillaume Canet (in Une vie meilleure)
2012: Jeremie Elkaim (in Hand in the Hand)
2013: Matthew McConaughey (in Dallas Buyers Club)
2006: Ariane Ascaride (in Le voyage en Arménie)
2007: Jiang Wenli (in And the Spring Comes)
2008: Donatella Finocchiaro (in Galantuomini)
2009: Helen Mirren (in The Last Station)
2010: All of the actresses in Las buenas hierbas
2011: Noomi Rapace in Babycall
2012: Isabella Ferrari in And They Call It Summer
2013: Scarlett Johansson in Her
2006: This Is England by Shane Meadows
2010: Poll by Chris Kraus
2011: The Eye of the Storm by Fred Schepisi
2011: Circumstance by Maryam Keshavarz
2012: Alì ha gli occhi azzurri by Claudio Giovannesi
2013: Quod Erat Demonstrandum by Andrei Gruzsniczk
2006: Sean Connery
2007: Sophia Loren
2008: Clint Eastwood
2009: Meryl Streep
2010: Julianne Moore
2011: Richard Gere
The audience will be the star of the event and will choose the award-winners in each section of the programme: the most important acknowledgments will therefore be awarded on the basis of the votes cast by the audience after the screenings.
The Rome Film Festival is produced by the Cinema per Roma Foundation, whose president is Paolo Ferrari. The General Manager is Lamberto Mancini
The Artistic Director of the Festival is Marco Müller
Venice Film Festival
Rome Quadriennale
