Shelter is a 2010 American supernatural horror film directed by Måns Mårlind and Björn Stein, written by Michael Cooney, and starring Julianne Moore and Jonathan Rhys Meyers. The film was released as 6 Souls in the United States on March 1, 2013, for video on demand, followed by a limited theatrical release on April 5, 2013.
After the death of her husband, Dr. Cara Harding's (Julianne Moore) faith in God has been shaken, but not her belief in science. In an attempt to get her more open to accepting unexplainable psychiatric theories, her father (Jeffrey DeMunn) introduces her to Adam (Jonathan Rhys Meyers), a patient with multiple personalities who also takes on some of the physical characteristics of his other personalities. Cara quickly discovers that his other personalities were murder victims; and the more she finds out about Adam and his past, the closer she and her loved ones are to becoming victims themselves.
Julianne Moore as Cara Harding-Jessup
Jonathan Rhys Meyers as David / Adam / Wesley
Jeffrey DeMunn as Dr. Harding
Frances Conroy as Mrs. Bernburg
Nathan Corddry as Stephen Harding
Brooklynn Proulx as Sammy Jessup
Joyce Feurring as Granny Holler Witch
KatiAna Davis as The Familiar
Michael Graves as Holler Man
Rick Applegate as Warden Collins
Jim Brough as Holler Man
Jeffrey Jones as Police Officer
Much of the film was shot in various locations across the Pittsburgh, PA region. Locations used include: Downtown Pittsburgh and its bridges, the Fort Pitt Tunnel, East Liberty Presbyterian Church, Jones Hall at Community College of Allegheny County, Ritter's Diner near Shadyside, Spin Bartini & Ultra Lounge in Shadyside, various locations in Braddock including the Braddock Carnegie Library and home of Mayor John Fetterman, a residence in the city's Schenley Farms neighborhood, the Collier maintenance yard, and a recreated 17th century Native American village at the Meadowcroft Rockshelter. Peter Martorano, the film's location manager, worked with the Pittsburgh Film Office.
The United Kingdom release was set with a cinema release on April 9, 2010.
The film has been met with entirely negative reviews, garnering a 4% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Mike Sheridan from Entertainment.ie gave the film two stars out of five stating Shelter is "A thriller desperately trying to throw the audience off at every corner, just as writer Michael Cooney's previous screenplay effort Identity did to mostly stellar effect, Shelter is instead a whole lot of stupid wrapped in moody packaging." Mark Harrison from Den of Geek gave a more positive review, calling it "horror by numbers, but it's at least sparing with whatever felt tip pen denotes ‘jump scares'".
