James Michael "Jimmy" Bennett (born February 9, 1996) is an American actor and musician. He is known for his roles as a child actor in Daddy Day Care, Hostage, Poseidon, Evan Almighty, Orphan and as young James T. Kirk in the 2009 film Star Trek. He also starred on the ABC series No Ordinary Family as JJ Powell, a teenager gifted with vast intelligence after a plane crash.
Bennett was born in Seal Beach, California, and now lives with his parents and sister in Huntington Beach, California, where the family runs a hard rock-themed crepe restaurant. When not acting, Bennett plays guitar and sings on his official YouTube channel. He also wrote and performed the song Summer Never Ends which can be heard at the end of Shorts.
Bennett appeared in nearly 30 adverts, as well as in episodes of the television series The Guardian and Strong Medicine, before being cast in the role "Tony", the boy who wants to be The Flash, in the Eddie Murphy comedy Daddy Day Care. He had smaller roles in the films Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy and Arthur Hailey's Detective. He has also appeared in Judging Amy, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and Everwood, and lent his voice to characters in the animated films The Polar Express, Winnie the Pooh: Springtime with Roo and I Want a Dog for Christmas, Charlie Brown. He has been nominated for Young Artist Awards five times.
In 2005, Bennett appeared in the film Hostage, where he starred with Bruce Willis, and The Amityville Horror remake, where he played the role of the middle child of a family moving into a haunted house. The films were released in March and April, respectively. He was called "Jimmy Two-Takes" on the set of "Hostage", because of his ability to deliver his lines perfectly.
In February 2006, Bennett appeared in the thriller Firewall, where he played the son of Harrison Ford's character. He also played an abused boy named Jeremiah (aged 7) sharing the role with Dylan and Cole Sprouse playing the older Jeremiah (aged 11) in The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things, an independent film that was released a month after Firewall. Also in 2006, he voiced Roo in the Disney/Square-Enix video game Kingdom Hearts II and appeared in Poseidon, a remake of the 1972 film The Poseidon Adventure. His 2007 roles included South of Pico, an independent film, and Evan Almighty, a sequel to the 2003 film Bruce Almighty. He appeared as a young James T. Kirk in the 2009 film Star Trek. He also starred in the 2009 film Orphan and the TV series No Ordinary Family.
Bennett also starred in the film Bones, featuring him alongside famed Ozzy Osbourne guitarist and Black Label Society frontman Zakk Wylde. Bones is described as a "heartbreaking coming-of-age story of four teens growing up in 1989 blue-collar Long Island, New York, and the bond that would tie them together for life." It is noteworthy that in 2009, Jimmy Bennett starred in the leading role of the film Alabama Moon.
In August 2011, Bennett released his debut single "Over Again" and the accompanying music video.
On January 27th 2016 Jimmy entered a relationship with Keely Bennett ( Not related, just the same surname)
