Seeking a Friend for the End of the World is a 2012 American comedy-drama film written and directed by Lorene Scafaria, in her directorial debut. The film stars Steve Carell and Keira Knightley. The title and plot are a reference to a track on Chris Cornell's 1999 album, Euphoria Morning, called "Preaching the End of the World". Filming began May 2011, in Los Angeles, California. The film was theatrically released on June 22, 2012 in the United States by Focus Features. The movie received mixed reviews from critics and it earned $9.6 million on a $10 million budget. Seeking a Friend for the End of the World was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc and made available for digital streaming in the United States on October 23, 2012.
In New York City, a news report is broadcast informing the world that a mission to stop an incoming asteroid has failed, and that the asteroid will make impact in three weeks, destroying all life on Earth. Dodge Petersen (Steve Carell) and his wife Linda (Nancy Carell) listen to the broadcast from the side of the road. When Dodge makes an uninterested response, Linda looks at him in disgust and flees the vehicle.
While everyone around him reacts differently to the news—from suicide to constant drugs and guilt-free sex—Dodge's life has not changed at all. He does not stop going into his meaningless job as an insurance salesman, still employs his cleaning lady, and spends his nights alone.
After attending a friend's wild party, where he declines offers of sex and drugs, Dodge returns home to reminisce about his high school sweetheart, Olivia, when he notices his neighbor Penny (Keira Knightley) crying on the fire escape. She has just broken up with her boyfriend Owen (Adam Brody) for making her miss her last opportunity to see her family in England. At her apartment, Penny gives Dodge three years' worth of his mail that was incorrectly delivered to her and in the process unwittingly tells him that his wife was having an affair.
Dodge storms off into the night, guzzling codeine-laced cough syrup and window cleaner in a suicide attempt. He wakes up in a park, with a dog tethered to his foot and a note on his sweater reading "Sorry", which becomes the dog's namesake. Dodge takes Sorry home, opens the old mail, and is surprised to discover a three-month-old letter from Olivia, which explains that he was "the love of her life". Later, a riot breaks out on his block. Abandoning the self-centered Owen amidst the rioters, Dodge explains to Penny that he knows someone who could fly her to England if she helps him find Olivia. She agrees and the two set off with Sorry for Dodge's hometown in Delaware.
Along the way, Dodge and Penny run out of gas, share a bizarre experience with a suicidal motorist (William Petersen), witness the eruption of an orgy at a restaurant, have sex in a pick-up truck, and spend a night in jail. They get a ride to Camden, New Jersey, where they meet Penny's ex-boyfriend Speck (Derek Luke), who is prepared for the apocalypse. Speck has a working satellite phone in his bunker, and lets Penny contact her family. Penny and Dodge borrow a car of Speck's and eventually make it to Olivia's family home. Dodge and Penny walk up toward the door of the home, they find no one and spend the day together, during which they realize mutual affection. Penny discovers a letter from Olivia to her parents, which reveals Olivia's address. Penny and Dodge drive to Olivia's home, where upon arrival, Dodge leaves a letter to Olivia and expresses his feelings for Penny. Later, they discover a marriage ceremony performed at the beach; Dodge and Penny kiss and join the ceremony. Afterward, they go to the house of the man who Dodge promised could take Penny to England. This man turns out to be Dodge's estranged father, Frank (Martin Sheen). After making amends with Frank, Dodge puts a sleeping Penny into his father's plane, whispering to her that she is the real love of his life. Frank and Penny depart, leaving Dodge behind.
Dodge returns to his apartment with Sorry; they soon enter Penny's apartment, where Dodge sets a record in her turntable and listens until the power dies. Lighting a candle, Dodge hears Sorry whining - Penny has returned, upset that he allowed her to leave; they embrace. As the two lie in bed, Penny is scared, knowing that, in only moments, human life on Earth will be annihilated. Dodge distracts her by asking her to tell him of her childhood. They feel and hear a deep booming sound, and Penny tells Dodge she wishes they had known each other sooner. Dodge replies that there never would have been enough time together, and professes his love for her. When they feel and hear a second deep, booming sound, Penny panics, telling him she thought they would save each other, and Dodge assures her they did. Finally, Penny smiles as the screen fades to white.
Lorene Scafaria wanted to "tell the story of boy meets girl with a really ticking clock", prompted by recent events in her own life, including a "death in the family, a breakup, and a new relationship". Scafaria also took inspiration from her experience during the September 11th attacks: having recently moved from New York to LA the attack left her feeling "stranded" and as a result she ended up getting in contact with old friends. later noting to the Huffington Post she " found it interesting that this cataclysmic event would have such an effect on my own human behavior and relationships."  In terms of movies Scarfaria found inspiration in films such as 2012 and The Day After Tomorrow The story, specifically that of an "unexpected romance blossoming between two strangers while on an impromptu road trip", shares simiarities to that of her previous screenplay, Nick and Norah's Infinite Playlist. and it was in fact titling the previous movie that she thought "what if you took forever off the table?  Scafaria said that Adam Brody helped her with the script, giving her a male perspective to the soundtrack. Filming began May 2011, in Los Angeles, California.
The movie received mixed reviews from critics, with many praising the cast, particularly Knightley and Carell. According to Rotten Tomatoes, 55% of critics gave it a positive review, with the consensus "Tender, charming, and well-acted, Seeking a Friend for the End of the World is unfortunately hamstrung by jarring tonal shifts and a disappointing final act." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun Times gave the film a positive review and said that "The best parts of this sweet film involve the middle stretches, when time, however limited, reaches ahead, and the characters do what they can to prevail in the face of calamity. How can I complain that they don't entirely succeed? Isn't the dilemma of the plot the essential dilemma of life?" Joe Neumaier of the New York Daily News said that the film was "One of the year's most emotionally affecting movies." Film critic Nathan Heller wrote in Vogue magazine that the script was "desperately in need of a good edit" while commending the performances of Knightley and Carell, asserting: "Carell and, more surprisingly, Knightley are comedians proficient enough to sell the banter". The film performed poorly on its opening weekend, earning only $3 million and managed to debut at Number 4 on the UK Box Office for the week ending July 15, 2012.
Seeking a Friend for the End of the World was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc and made available for digital streaming in the United States on October 23, 2012.
Wouldn't It Be Nice - Performed by The Beach Boys
The Cherry Tree - Written and Performed by Steve Sidwell
Bopology - Written and Performed by Ray Davies
Devil Inside - Performed by INXS
Dance Hall Days - Performed by Wang Chung
Home to Sacramento - Performed by The Steam Machine
Cinco de Hiphop - Performed by Francisco Santacruz
Ooh - Performed by Scissor Sisters
New Day - Performed by Hallo Moon
Pastel Lights - Performed by Ishi
Everybody Have Fun Tonight - Performed by Wang Chung
Sex Tourists - Performed by French Kicks
On My Radio - Performed by The Selecter
My Time To Shine - Performed by Guilty Simpson
Set Adrift On Memory Bliss - Performed by PM Dawn
In The Time Of My Ruin - Performed by Frank Black
Let's Go Out Tonight - Performed by Lions
Cavaleade - Written and Performed by Roger Renaud
Tijuana Ride - Written and Performed by Paul Williams
This Guy's In Love With You - Performed by Herb Alpert & The Tijuana Brass
The Air That I Breathe - Performed by The Hollies
The Sun Ain't Gonna Shine (Anymore) - Performed by The Walker Brothers
Stay With Me - Performed by The Walker Brothers
