The Cheetah Girls: One World (also known as The Cheetah Girls 3 or The Cheetah Girls 3: One World) is a 2008 Disney Channel Original Movie which first premiered on Disney Channel on August 22, 2008. It is the third and final film of The Cheetah Girls film trilogy, and the only film without the participation of Raven-Symoné.
With Galleria at the University of Cambridge in England, Chanel (Adrienne Bailon), Dorinda (Sabrina Bryan), and Aqua (Kiely Williams) are cast in the lavish new Bollywood movie "Namaste Bombay". The Cheetah Girls travel across the globe to India. There, they meet Rahim (Rupak Ginn), the man cast as the lead, whom they realize is attractive, yet somewhat clumsy. After meeting the movie's choreographer, Gita (Deepti Daryanani), a dance battle erupts between themselves and Gita with her backup dancers. They subsequently discover that the musical's director, Vikram "Vik" (Michael Steger), must choose only one Cheetah for the role as the budget is only enough for one star.
When it becomes apparent that they must travel home, they are upset, until realizing they may each try out for the lead. Though they all make a promise to be fair in the competition, situations arise in which each member becomes jealous of the others' specific talents. Chanel befriends Vik, Dorinda befriends Rahim, and Aqua befriends a boy she has been in contact with since before leaving America, Amar (Kunal Sharma). Each girl is led to believe the producer of the film, Khamal (Roshan Seth), Vik's uncle, will choose her after the audition. Chanel is told because she is the better singer, she will receive the role, while Dorinda is promised the role as she is the best dancer, while Aqua is convinced the coveted role will be hers as she is the best actress. The three Cheetahs audition against one another with Chanel being awarded the role, which she later refuses realizing, as do the other Cheetahs, that friendship and unity are more important than furthering their individual or group careers.
After refusing the role, they set to convince Khamal to award Gita as the lead, to which he reluctantly agrees, ending in a scene from "Namaste Bombay" in which the Cheetahs sing and dance the titular song, "One World".
Adrienne Bailon as Chanel Simmons
Sabrina Bryan as Dorinda Thomas
Kiely Williams as Aquanette Walker
Michael Steger as Vikram
Deepti Daryanani as Gita
Rupak Ginn as Rahim
Roshan Seth as Uncle Kamal Bhatia
Disney Channel announced the film with the plot involving the Cheetah Girls going to India to star in a Bollywood production. Like The Cheetah Girls 2, it was filmed on location in a foreign country. In an interview, Bailon stated the movie would film for a three-month period, in India, and that she had been doing research for the film. She also stated that "all of the original cast will be back". However, Raven-Symoné later confirmed that she would not return for this film as she was busy with her fourth studio album and was filming movies such as College Road Trip.
Filming began in Udaipur, India during March 2008. Like High School Musical 2, Disney featured a "play your part" role, where viewers and fans could choose elements of the film.
During the premiere airing of Camp Rock, the first of many Road to "Cheetah Girls One World" segments debuted.
The soundtrack was released on August 19, 2008. The soundtrack, which has been released in several versions, contains elements of both hip hop and Indian music.
Cheetah Love by The Cheetah Girls
Dig a Little Deeper by The Cheetah Girls
Dance Me If You Can by The Cheetah Girls
Fly Away by The Cheetah Girls
Stand Up by Adrienne Bailon
What If by Adrienne Bailon
I'm the One by The Cheetah Girls
No Place Like Us by The Cheetah Girls
One World by The Cheetah Girls
Feels Like Love by The Cheetah Girls (featured on the DVD/Blu-ray disc on the extended edition)
Crazy on the Dance Floor by Sabrina Bryan
Circle Game by Kiely Williams
It had sold 34,000 copies on its first week and has been #13 on Billboard 200.
New segments of The Road to The Cheetah Girls: One World air Fridays, giving information and sneak peeks of the film.
Hooray for Bollywood
Hip Hop Kathak
Animal Crackers
Girl Scouts
Hang with Adrienne
Hang with Sabrina
Get to know Kiely
Meet the Guys
Meet Deepti
And also to promote the soundtrack, 2 segments of The Cheetah Girls: One World playback premiered on Disney Channel to give information about the Indian sound of music in the soundtrack.
The movie premiered to over 6.2 million viewers, and reached 7 million viewers in its final half hour. This still failed to meet the ratings of the first two and was the series' lowest-rated premiere. In the UK, its premiere night scored 412,000 on Disney Channel UK, making it #1 of the week, and received 182,000 on Disney Channel UK +1, also #1 on that channel for the week, totalling 594,000.
The "Extended Music Edition" DVD and Blu-ray Disc of The Cheetah Girls: One World, was released on December 16, 2008 in the United States. It includes an exclusive music sequence titled "Feels Like Love", as well as a downloadable exclusive remixed version of "Feels Like Love". It also featured a "Rock-Along" mode, "Cheetah Spots", and an alternate version of the movie with pop-up fun facts and music videos. The Region 2 DVD was released on March 16, 2009.
