From Beginning to End (Portuguese: Do Começo ao Fim) is a 2009 Brazilian drama film that premiered on November 27, 2009, starring Fábio Assunção, Júlia Lemmertz, Gabriel Kaufmann, Lucas Cotrim, João Gabriel Vasconcellos and Rafael Cardoso.
The film is considered low budget, not exceeding 2 million. Aluizio Abranches, creator and director of the film, took his idea to many entrepreneurs, some of them even suggested that it should be a relationship between a brother and sister or heterosexual, but Abranches was true to his idea and did not give up on it, until he got sponsorship from a small producer Marco Nanini.
The film’s director claims it is not intended in any way to raise flags. Although the film deals with homosexuality and incest, two types of relationships that are often considered "taboo", Abranches stated that his only intention was to show a love story.
1986 — Thomás is born with his eyes closed, and he does not open them for several weeks following the birth. Julieta, his mother, is unconcerned, believing that when Thomás is ready and wants to open his eyes, he will. These events instill a strong belief in free will in young Thomás. One day, seemingly out of nowhere, Thomás opens his eyes, apparently to look directly at his five-year-old half-brother Francisco.
1992 — Julieta is a wife and a loving mother, working in a hospital emergency department. Her free-spirited youngest son, Thomás, is the product of her marriage to her second husband Alexandre. Pedro, her first husband and father of her eldest son Francisco, lives in Argentina. Pedro and Julieta remain good friends. During childhood, Francisco and Thomás are very close, perhaps too close according to Pedro, with whom they spend a Christmas holiday in Buenos Aires.
2008 — Years later, when Francisco is 27 and Thomás 22, Julieta dies. The brothers become lovers and an unusual love story ensues.
Rafael Cardoso as Thomás (at age 20)
João Gabriel Vasconcellos as Francisco (at age 25
Júlia Lemmertz as Julieta (mother)
Fábio Assunção as Alexandre (father of Thomás)
Jean Pierre Noher as Pedro (father of Francisco)
Louise Cardoso as Rosa
Mausi Martínez
Gabriel Kaufmann as Thomás (at age six)
Lucas Cotrim as Francisco (at age 11))
The movie was filmed almost entirely in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Parts of the movie were filmed in Buenos Aires, Argentina.
The soundtrack was released in December 2009, and has been a huge hit all over Brazil. It brings together several big names from Brazilian pop music such as Maria Bethania, Angela Ro Ro, Simone and Zizi Possi. Songs like "Summer 78", "Folhas de Outono", "Saudade" and "Outono" have become the biggest hits on this album.
The film attracted more than ten thousand viewers during its weekend debut. Playing in only nine theaters (compared with 550 showing 2012), the film finished sixth place during its opening weekend.
The film was shown on May 26 during the 2010 Seattle International Film Festival. In June 26 during the 2010 Frameline Film Festival. In July 9 during the 2010 Outfest Film Festival and July 15 during the 2010 QFest.
The director put the film's trailer on YouTube, generating more than 400,000 views and comments which ranged from outrage to enthusiasm.
From Beginning to End grossed $62,081 in nine theaters its opening weekend, $365,094 in second weekend, the film finished sixth place during its opening weekend. The film went on to gross $386,049 in Brazil and $14,373 in Taiwan, for a foreign total of $400,422.
The film has received mixed reviews, some praising it for retaining a good plot while transcending boundaries and others condemning it as an ordinary plot using the subject matter to gain attention.
