Keir David Peters Gilchrist (born September 28, 1992) is a Canadian actor. Gilchrist is known for playing Marshall Gregson on Showtime's original series United States of Tara, Craig Gilner in the 2010 comedy-drama film It's Kind of a Funny Story, and Paul in It Follows.
Gilchrist was born in Camden Town, London, to Canadian parents Catherine (née Peters) and Ian Gilchrist. He has a younger brother, Evan Gilchrist, who is also an actor. His maternal grandfather is Canadian banker, economist, and politician Douglas Peters, and his uncle is economist David Wilfrid Peters. He has Scottish, English, and Northern Irish ancestry. Gilchrist spent his early years in London, before relocating to Boston, Massachusetts during his childhood, then to New York City, before finally settling in Toronto, Ontario.
Gilchrist discovered his passion for acting at a young age, and his drama teacher persuaded him to become a professional actor. He attended the Annex Children's Theatre. Gilchrist's first significant television role was that of Josh McKellar on Fox's short-lived television sitcom The Winner, which aired in 2007. From 2009 until its ending in 2011, Gilchrist co-starred as Marshall Gregson, the son of the lead character portrayed by Toni Collette, on the Showtime comedy-drama series United States of Tara.
In 2009, Gilchrist won the lead role of Craig Gilner in the comedy-drama film It's Kind of a Funny Story, which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2010. In 2014, Gilchrist co-starred with Maika Monroe and Jake Weary in the thriller film It Follows. Also in 2014, he portrayed the lead role of Daniel Austin in the thriller film Dark Summer. He next starred as John Lovett in The Stanford Prison Experiment (2014), and William in Len and Company (2015). In 2015, he also portrayed the boyfriend of Taissa Farmiga's character in the Cannes Film Festival-winning short drama film Share. In May 2015, he and James Caan were cast to co-star in the thriller film The Waiting.
