Luke Ford (born 26 March 1981) is a Canadian-born Australian actor.
Ford was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada but raised in Sydney, Australia. He attended Parramatta Marist High School in Westmead, Sydney, and once worked at the Winston Hills Hotel, and a short stint at Universal Magazines in North Ryde. Ford studied acting at The Actor's Pulse in Sydney, becoming one of the school's earliest graduates. He later returned to teach the Meisner Technique when he was between film roles.
Ford began acting professionally with a string of performances on Australian television, starting with a guest starring role on Water Rats, followed by roles on McLeod's Daughters, Home and Away, Stingers, Breakers, and All Saints. He appeared in the TV movie The Junction Boys alongside Tom Berenger, as Iphicles in the NBC miniseries Hercules, and in the short-lived Australian series Headland.
Ford was short listed for a 'Best New Talent' Logie Award for his recurring role of Craig Woodland on McLeod's Daughters.
Ford's film career began with the release of the Australian film Kokoda in 2006, delivering a performance as Burke, a slain soldier on the Kokoda Trail.
Next came The Black Balloon with Toni Collette, a tour de force performance that won him an Australian Film Institute Award for Best Supporting Actor in 2008. In the film, Ford plays Charlie Mollison, a boy with autism and ADD. Ford spent six months researching the role, including taking to the streets of Sydney in character to determine the effectiveness of his characterisation. The Black Balloon premiered at the Berlin Film Festival, where it won the Crystal Bear award.
Immediately following The Black Balloon, Ford signed on to star in the third installment of the Mummy series, The Mummy: Tomb of the Dragon Emperor opposite Brendan Fraser and Maria Bello. In the film, Ford plays Alex O'Connell, son of Fraser's Rick O'Connell and Bello's Evelyn O'Connell. The film was released in the US on 1 August 2008.
In 2009, he had roles in 3 Acts of Murder and Ghost Machine.
In 2010 and 2011, he had roles in several Australian films, including Animal Kingdom, Red Dog and Face to Face.
