Ashley Laurence is an American actress and artist. She is noted for her appearances in horror films, particularly the Hellraiser series. Ashley's acting career began at a very young age, when she was cast as the strong-willed heroine of Clive Barker's quintessential horror classic: Hellraiser (1987). The award winning actress subsequently appeared in a wide variety of roles for film, including Hellbound: Hellraiser II (1988), Lightning Bug (2004), Red (2008), and national advertising campaigns for Geico, Coors Lite, AT&T.
Laurence rose to prominence with her breakout role as Kirsty Cotton, the protagonist of Hellraiser (1987), which introduced the horror icon Pinhead. Hellraiser was met to critical acclaim and has gained a cult following. Laurence reprised her role as Kirsty in the sequel Hellbound: Hellraiser II (1988) which was another critical success and commercial success. The first two Hellraiser films have been regarded as horror classics. Laurence had a cameo appearance in Hellraiser III: Hell on Earth (1992). The same year, Ashley appeared in the horror film Mikey. Laurence has also starred in The Lurking Fear (1994) and Savate (1995). She reprised her role as Kirsty Cotton in Hellraiser: Hellseeker (2002). She was featured in the 2004 E! True Hollywood Story episode "Scream Queens". In 2004, she starred in Lightning Bug. Though most of her work has been in film, during the course of her career she has appeared in episodes of television series such as Suddenly Susan, ER and Beverly Hills, 90210, and has been featured in national television commercials for Geico as well as having been the sexy Coors Light "Beerman" in one of the company's national ad campaigns. She was also featured in the Hallmark television movies Gentle Ben and Gentle Ben: Danger on the Mountain. In 2008, she appeared in the critically acclaimed film Red, based on the novel by Jack Ketchum. She also appeared in Slipknot's short film for their song Snuff, which was released in December 2009. It has been announced that Laurence will be in the upcoming film Gutter Slut (2014). Laurence has finished filming for The Green Fairy (2015). In 2014, Laurence made her voice-over debut in the video game The Vanishing of Ethan Carter.
