The Rebound is a 2009 American romantic comedy film directed by Bart Freundlich, starring Catherine Zeta-Jones and Justin Bartha. It was released in theaters in several countries in late 2009. It was originally scheduled to be released in the United States on December 25, 2010, but was cancelled due to the film's distributor shutting down. It ended up going direct-to-DVD in the United States on February 7, 2012.
A housewife and mother of two, Sandy (Catherine Zeta-Jones), discovers that her husband has been unfaithful. After a hasty divorce, she leaves home and goes to New York City with her young son and daughter. There, they begin a new life. Sandy rents an apartment above a coffee house and befriends one of the waiters, Aram Finklestein (Justin Bartha). At age 25, Aram is not sure what he wants to do with his life although he has a college degree and a tendency toward Women's Studies and Feminism. He decides to babysit Sandy's children and becomes their full-time nanny. He develops a close-knit relationship with the children; and a chemistry starts to brew between Aram and Sandy, ensuing in an awkward sexual encounter that the children come to know about.
Notwithstanding, they start to date; and, after two months, they seem perfect together. One day, Sandy feels nauseated and suspects she is pregnant. Aram is thrilled and looks forward to raising a child with her. A doctor confirms that Sandy is pregnant, but it is an ectopic pregnancy and will result in a miscarriage. As they leave the doctor, a fight breaks out between Aram and Sandy, with the latter confirming that she thinks it's ludicrous that the two of them, with an age difference of 15 years, would ever be happy together. After the break up, Aram decides to travel the world and to improve the lives of others. Sandy is promoted at her job.
After five years, the two have a chance encounter in a restaurant. Aram reveals he has adopted a young boy from Bangladesh and is still single. Sandy, who is celebrating another promotion with her children and a colleague, invites Aram and his family to join them. The film ends as the two hold hands underneath the table whilst their children start to bond.
Catherine Zeta-Jones as Sandy
Justin Bartha as Aram Finklestein
Kelly Gould as Sadie
Art Garfunkel as Harry Finklestein
John Schneider (cameo) as Trevor
Marcel Simoneau as Henri
Joanna Gleason as Roberta Finklestein
Steve Antonucci as Waiter, Aram´s Friend
Lynn Whitfield as Laura
Stephanie Szostak as Alice
Rob Kerkovich as Mitch
Alice Playten as Sensei Dana
Sam Robards as Frank
Andrew Cherry as Frank Jr., age 7
Jake Cherry as Frank Jr., age 13 (uncredited)
Skai Jackson as Museum Little Girl #1
Saadet Aksoy as Turkish girl in cafe
Michael Chernus as Actor #3
This was Alice Playten's last role before her death in 2011.
The Rebound received generally negative reviews from film critics. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 42% based on 24 reviews with 10 fresh reviews and 14 rotten. Jon Frosch, a top critic, said: "Saddling two game actors with a tone-deaf, charmless script, the film makes recent J.Lo vehicle The Back-up Plan look like Billy Wilder in comparison." Alex Zane said: "These are characters who seem very real. It's their imperfections, not contrived plot points, that drive the story."
The film grossed $21,790,414 worldwide.
