Kim Sa-rang (Hangul: 김사랑; born January 12, 1978) is a South Korean actress. She is most known for her work in the Television series Secret Garden with Hyun Bin, A Love to Kill with Rain and Shin Min-ah in 2005, Beloved Eun-dong with Joo Jin-mo in 2015 and being crowned Miss Korea in 2000 at the Sejong Cultural Center in Seoul, South Korea and representing Korea in the 2001 Miss Universe Pageant. Recently she became a free agent after leaving Brave Entertainment.
Kim was crowned Miss Korea on May 28, 2000 at the Sejong Cultural Center, the site of the 1980 Miss Universe Pageant. She represented Korea in the Miss Universe Pageant 2001. During the pageant, she won the award for Best National Costume, which was a Korean hanbok dress.
Kim Sa-rang was born on 12th January, 1978 in South Korea. Kim earned both a Bachelors and Master's degree in traditional Korean music at Yong-Im University. Kim Sa-rang’s current relationship status is unknown and she has not discussed this matter publicly.
Kim Sa-Rang is a Christian and has one older brother.
Gwangyoung Girls' High School
Yongin University, University of Art and Culture (B.A)
Yongin University Graduate School of Master (M.A)
Kim Sa-rang made her acting debut in 2000 in the television drama series ‘Anger of Angel’ which garnered positive reviews. In 2001 she was cast in the television drama series ‘How Should I Be’. That same year, she got her first big role in a television drama series entitled ‘Mina’ which was again met with positive reviews and was considered a rising star. In 2003, she appeared in ‘Thousand Years of Love’. Her other roles in television include appearances in A Love to Kill, ‘The King and I’, ‘Tokyo Sun Shower’ and Secret Garden. She was last seen in the TV drama series Beloved Eun-dong. Kim made her first movie debut in 2002 with ‘Man is Born’ Following this, Kim also starred in ‘Love: Impossible’, ‘Who Slept with Her?’ and ‘Radio Dayz’. She has also appeared in several K-pop music videos including ‘Because You’re My Woman’ and Demon.
