Willie Garson (born William Garson Paszamant; February 20, 1964) is an American character actor. He has appeared in over fifty movies, usually playing minor roles. He is known for playing Stanford Blatch on the HBO series Sex and the City and in the related films Sex and the City and Sex and the City 2, and for his role as Mozzie, in the USA Network series White Collar from 2009 to 2014.
Garson was born in Highland Park, New Jersey. Garson attended Camp Wekeela in Hartford, Maine as a child for 11 years. He received a theater degree from Wesleyan University and also attended Yale Drama School.
Garson had a recurring role as Henry Coffield on NYPD Blue and as Stanford Blatch on Sex and the City. His other television appearances include Mr. Belvedere, My Two Dads, Coach ("The Loss Weekend" episode as a clerk), Quantum Leap (once as a newspaper salesman/hack writer, and once as Lee Harvey Oswald), Monk, Boy Meets World, Girl Meets World (playing four different characters in the latter two shows' universe), Ally McBeal, Party of Five, Star Trek: Voyager (in the episode Thirty Days), Special Unit 2, Just Shoot Me!, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Friends, The X-Files (twice and as two different characters), Cheers (as a waiter in the episode Cape Cad), Yes, Dear, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, Pushing Daisies, Stargate SG-1 (3 episodes), Wizards of Waverly Place, CSI: Miami, Mental, Spin City, and Taken. He co-starred in the 2007 HBO series John from Cincinnati. He co-starred as Mozzie in the USA Network series White Collar from 2009 to 2014.
Garson has also appeared in three movies from the Farrelly brothers—Kingpin, There's Something About Mary, and Fever Pitch. His other film credits include Groundhog Day, Just Like Heaven, The Rock, Fortress 2: Re-Entry, Being John Malkovich, Freaky Friday, Labor Pains, and Out Cold. He made a cameo in the end credits of Jackass Number Two, with the full context of the cameo being explained in Jackass 2.5.
In 2009, Garson adopted a seven-year-old son, Nathan.
