Top Secret! is a 1984 American action comedy film written and directed by David Zucker, Jim Abrahams and Jerry Zucker. It stars Val Kilmer (in his film debut role) and Lucy Gutteridge alongside a supporting cast featuring Omar Sharif, Peter Cushing, Michael Gough, and Jeremy Kemp.
The film is a parody of both the musicals starring Elvis Presley and spy films of the Cold War era. The original music score was composed by Maurice Jarre.
Nick Rivers, a United States rock star, has the number one song in America ("Skeet Surfing"). He travels to East Germany to perform at a cultural festival, and at a dinner, he sees the beautiful Hillary Flammond, a member of the resistance movement, attempting to avoid the authorities. He pretends to be her date to get to know her, and performs an impromptu song and dance ("Tutti-Frutti") mistakenly thinking that he was asked to do so, to the delight of Hillary and the crowd but to the annoyance of a powerful German commander. He later sees Hillary at a ballet, where she is trying to meet with a resistance contact, but is met by the police instead. Nick saves her and they try to escape, but Nick turns himself in so that Hillary can get away. He is taken to a prison where he is questioned and tortured, but he knows nothing and does not break. In an escape attempt, he ends up in the secret lab of Dr. Paul Flammond, a brilliant scientist developing the "Polaris naval mine", a device that can destroy the entire NATO submarine fleet; the Germans force him to work by threatening to kill his daughter Hillary. Nick is recaptured and scheduled for execution.
The East Germans decide that Nick must perform to avoid an international incident, and he does so to the rapturous joy of the local girls ("How Silly Can You Get"/"Spend This Night with Me"). He is rescued by Hillary at the end of his performance after which they spend the night in the loft of a Swedish bookstore. Nick plays for her ("Are You Lonesome Tonight?") and they make love. They are moved to the "Potato Farm" where they meet members of the French Resistance, led by Nigel "The Torch", who was a lover of Hillary from when they were stranded on an island as youths. Nick is upset by Hillary's residual love for Nigel, but accepts that they must work together for the cause. After fighting off an attack by the Germans, they move to a soda shop where Nick proves that he's not a traitor by performing for the locals ("Straighten Out the Rug").
The resistance group stages a rescue of Dr. Flammond, where Nigel and Du Quois, a resistance leader, dress up in a fake cow outfit to disable the defenses. As the other members successfully infiltrate the prison, Nigel reveals himself as the traitor, but is thwarted by an amorous bull. Dr. Flammond is rescued, but Nigel makes off with Hillary, and Nick is forced to rescue her in an underwater barroom fight. With their flight about to leave, Hillary chooses to go with Nick and her father to America. She says farewell to her resistance friends; as with Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz, she saves the Scarecrow for last (despite his never having been seen in the movie up to this point).
The film features short performances by Omar Sharif as Agent Cedric, and Peter Cushing as the Swedish bookstore proprietor, in a scene filmed completely in reverse.
After the success of Airplane! the team of ZAZ were unsure of what to do next. They made the TV series Police Squad! but it performed poorly.
David Zucker:
We just needed a subject that we would be excited about. Starting out, we didn’t have a whole genre like the airplane disaster movies. We were just fans of those black and white World War II movies that were made during the war. Somehow, we didn’t think that was enough: we didn’t want to do a period piece, we wanted to make it contemporary. That was the whole concept of ‘Top Secret!’: that it was not necessarily grounded in reality, but it would have kind of this heightened sense of craziness – even to which genres we were picking, which was a split hybrid between Elvis movies and the World War II movies.
David Zucker said they had been working on the script since Airplane! "but we just couldn't figure out how to do it. We made repeated attempts to combine a rock and roll movie with a World War II movie but it was very difficult to do... We already had ideas for scenes we wanted to do and we tried to fit in plot around those scenes". A fourth writer, Martyn Burke, was brought in to work on the plot. "If it weren't for Martyn we'd still be sitting in that room," said Jerry Zucker.
The film was mostly written in an office at their lawyers'.
The film's budget was a reported $8.5 million, whereas Airplane! was made for $3.2 million.
Kilmer was cast after the directors saw him in a play called 'Slab Boys' with Sean Penn and Kevin Bacon. He turned up to the audition dressed like Elvis Presley. "I like to think of it as the role Elvis never got but should have," said Abrahams.
Gutteridge, who plays the female lead, has just appeared in the Royal Shakespeare Company production of Nicholas Nickleby.
Unlike Airplane!, the film is not full of cameos from famous actors. "That was one of the jokes in Airplane! and we had done it and wanted to move on," said Zucker.
The film was test screened at various colleges, and audience responses helped the filmmakers cut back the length from two hours to 90 minutes.
The film was meant to be released on June 8, but Paramount pushed the date back to June 22, angering some exhibitors. The official reason was that Paramount wanted to avoid competing against Ghostbusters and Gremlins although rumours spread that the studio was dissatisfied with the film's quality. Producer Jon Davison denied this saying "Paramount has a lot of confidence in the picture or they wouldn't have cared. The mere fact that they've bothered to trouble some of their relationships with exhibitors shows their faith in the picture."
The film was considered a box office disappointment, though it still earned $20 million. A 1991 article speculated two possible reasons - the performance of Airplane II: The Sequel (although it had different producers to the original), along with "the lack of any clear sense of period, something that may throw viewers who insist on comedic nonessentials like interior logic. It's basically a parody of World War II-French Resistance movies, but along the way it also skewers '50s rock 'n' roll films... '60s "Beach Party" movies and "The Blue Lagoon," among other lampoon-worthy source material."
"The lesson we took from 'Airplane!' was just fill up 90 minutes with jokes, and you have a movie," reflected David Zucker later. "With 'Top Secret,' it's very funny, but it really isn't a good movie. It really didn't have a plot or real characters or real structure."
On Rotten Tomatoes, Top Secret! has an overall approval rating of 76% and a weighted average of 6.6/10. Roger Ebert rated it 3.5/4 and applauded the humour, noting that "To describe the plot would be an exercise in futility" and "This movie will cheerfully go for a laugh wherever one is even remotely likely to be found." "Weird Al" Yankovic considers this his all-time favourite movie. Cinema historian Leonard Maltin's review of the film was mixed (he scored it at 2.5 out of a possible 4): "Likably silly, with lots of laughs but not much momentum...and where's the ending?"
Hot Shots! and Hot Shots! Part Deux
Spy Hard
