The Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy has been awarded annually since 1952 by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA).
Currently, eligible films must be at least 70 minutes in length, and be commercially released for at least seven days in the "greater Los Angeles area" and screened for the HFPA membership. The commercial release must begin during the calendar year prior to the awards ceremony, and the screening can occur no later than one week after commercial release. For purposes of the award, a "musical" is "defined as a comedy or drama where the songs are used in place of spoken dialogue to further the plot." In addition, the film must have its principal dialogue in English.
There have been many animated films that have been nominated for Best Picture in the Musical or Comedy category. Though only three films (Beauty and the Beast, The Lion King, and Toy Story 2) have won, there have been many other nominated animated feature films. They include Aladdin, Toy Story, Shrek, Finding Nemo, and The Incredibles.
"†" means that the film won the Academy Award for Best Picture.
"*" means that the film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture.
Between 1989 and 2004, 10 animated feature films were nominated for the Golden Globe Award and 3 won:
1989 The Little Mermaid (nominated) (lost to Driving Miss Daisy)
1991 Beauty and the Beast (WON)
1992 Aladdin (nominated) (lost to The Player)
1994 The Lion King (WON)
1995 Toy Story (nominated) (lost to Babe)
1999 Toy Story 2 (WON)
2000 Chicken Run (nominated) (lost to Almost Famous)
2001 Shrek (nominated) (lost to Moulin Rouge!)
2003 Finding Nemo (nominated) (lost to Lost in Translation)
2004 The Incredibles (nominated) (lost to Sideways)
Under the 2007 revised rules of the HFPA, animated pictures are no longer eligible in this or the category of Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Drama, instead competing exclusively in the new category of Best Animated Feature Film.
BAFTA Award for Best Film
Academy Award for Best Picture
Critics’ Choice Movie Award for Best Picture
Critics’ Choice Movie Award for Best Comedy
Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture
