Argai: The Prophecy (Original French title: Argaï: La prophétie) is a 2000 French animated series (26 episodes) directed by Jean-César Suchorski and written by Sébastien Dorsey.
The story is partly set in the year 1250, partly in 2075. Angel, the fiancée of Prince Argaï, is under the spell of the Dark Queen. This evil Queen steals the youth of young women and keeps them asleep for the rest of their lives. This way, she remains immortal. To save his fiancée, Argaï travels through time and meets detective Oscar Lightbulb, his assistant Barnaby and his secretary Moony Moon. They decide to help Argaï with his battle against the queen and the rescue of his beloved. To defeat the queen, they have to awake Angel with an antidote which contains 13 unique ingredients. Their first challenge is to find each of these ingredients.
Unlike most stories involving time travel, when a character is killed in a time that is not their own, they are returned to their own time rather than dying. This is why it is necessary for the heroes to defeat Queen Orial in 2075 and for Queen Orial to kill Argaï in 1250, as it would not be permanent otherwise.
Chapter I. Prince Argai
Chapter II. The Man in the Mask
Chapter III. New York, 2075
Chapter IV. F-107
Chapter V. The Great Journey
Chapter VI. Notre-Dame de Paris
Chapter VII. The Mandrake
Chapter VIII. The Pharaoh's Amulet
Chapter IX. The Road to the Crusades
Chapter X. Alyasha
Chapter XI. Venice Submerged
Chapter XII. Brother Tish's Escape
Chapter XIII. The Enchanted Forest
Chapter XIV. In the Land of the Celts
Chapter XV. Lotus Flower
Chapter XVI. The Desert of Awikango
Chapter XVII. The Monastery of Tirloch
Chapter XVIII. The Knight Tournament
Chapter XIX. The Great Escape
Chapter XX. The Wild Orchid
Chapter XXI. The Sacred Pearl
Chapter XXII. The Thurible
Chapter XXIII. The Fairy Melusine
Chapter XXIV. The White Lady
Chapter XXV. Angele
Chapter XXVI. The Final Combat
Argaï
Angele
Oscar Lightbulb
Barnaby
Moony Moon
Hugsley Barns
Queen Orial/The Dark Queen
Gekko
King Khar (Argaï's Father)
Pasha
Mr. Po
Captain Billy
Brother Gregory
Brother Tich
Lord Artemis
Lucille
Master Wang
Forest Elf
Princess Lorelei
Singa
Innkeeper/Winegrower in Paris
Blind innkeeper in Paris
Fairy Melusine
Fairy Melusine's Leprechaun-Assistant
The White Lady
Tiberias
Jean Topart - The narrating monk
Bruno Choël - Argaï
Christian Alers - Oscar Lightbulb
Laura Préjean - Angèle
Marie-Christine Adam - The Dark Queen
Henri Labussière - Hugsley Barnes
Patricia Legrand - Miss Moon
Patrick Préjean - Barnaby
Benoît Allemane - Pacha
Jean Barney - King Khar (Argaï's father)
Michel Vigné - the narrator, the Devil
