Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory (Japanese: 機動戦士ガンダム0083 STARDUST MEMORY, Hepburn: Kidō Senshi Gandamu Daburuōeitīsrī Sutādasuto Memorī) is a 13-episode anime OVA series set in the Gundam universe. The first volume containing two 30-minute episodes was released in Japan on May 23, 1991. Subsequent volumes, containing one 30-minute episode each, followed every one or two months; the final volume went on sale on September 24, 1992. The series was directed by Mitsuko Kase (episodes 1–7) and Takashi Imanishi (episodes 2–13). The characters were designed by Toshihiro Kawamoto. Mechanical designs were by Shoji Kawamori (of Macross fame) and Hajime Katoki. Gundam 0083 was licensed in North America by Bandai Entertainment and was available on VHS and DVD. The OVA series aired on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim in 2002.
Set during October and November UC 0083, the series focuses on the crew of the Earth Federation Space Force assault carrier Albion as they try to recover a nuclear-armed Gundam mobile suit stolen by a Zeon group at a base in Australia. Little do they know that the theft is part of a greater plan to destabilize the Earth Federation by dropping a colony on North America to damage the Earth's food supply. At the same time, the Zeon forces stationed on the Axis asteroid base send a small force to prepare for the main body's arrival.
In the larger Universal Century storyline, 0083 depicts the transition of the Earth Federation between the events of Mobile Suit Gundam and Zeta Gundam, providing a backstory for the rise of the Titans organization.
Kou Uraki (コウ・ウラキ)
Ensign Kou Uraki is a 19-year-old Federation test pilot stationed at the Torrington base in Australia. When Anavel Gato steals the Gundam GP02A, Kou goes after him in the GP01. He is later assigned to the Albion's mobile suit team under the command of Lieutenant South Burning with orders to either recapture or destroy the GP02A. Voiced by: Ryo Horikawa (Japanese); Paul Stephen (English)
Nina Purpleton (ニナ・パープルトン)
Head engineer of the project that developed the two Gundams, which she is extremely protective over. She reluctantly allows Kou to pilot GP01 in order to recapture GP02A and the two of them slowly begin a romantic relationship. She is later revealed to have a romantic past with Anavel Gato. Voiced by: Rei Sakuma (Japanese); Dorothy Elias-Fahn (English)
Eiphar Synapse
Captain Eiphar Synapse is the commanding officer of the ship Albion, which is given the tall order of recapturing the stolen Gundam GP02A. Voiced by: Chikao Otsuka (Japanese); Simon Issacson (English)
South Burning
A senior pilot at the Federation's Torrington base, Lieutenant South Burning serves as mobile suit company commander for the Albion. He pilots a RGM-79C GM and later a RGM-79N GM Custom. He dies in the eighth episode when his GM suddenly malfunctions, but not before picking up a briefcase carrying details of what is known as "Operation Stardust." Voiced by: Masashi Sugawara (Japanese); George C. Cole (English)
Chuck Keith (チャック・キース)
Kou's wingman at the Torrington Base, he is likewise reassigned to the Albion as part of its mobile suit team. He is initially seen piloting a Zeon Zaku II captured by the Earth Federation but later pilots a GM Cannon II. Over the course of the series, he has a romantic connection with Albion chief mechanic Mora Bascht. Voiced by: Yoshiharu Yamada (Japanese); Sean Mitchell (English)
Bernard Monsha
Lieutenant Junior Grade Bernard Monsha is one of three mobile suit pilots assigned to the Albion after the theft at Torrington. He takes an immediate dislike to Kou and Keith, especially Kou for being chosen to pilot the Gundam GP01 despite a lack of experience. When he is not on duty, Monsha likes to drink, gamble, and chase women. Voiced by: Chafurin (Japanese); Dougary Grant (English)
Alpha Bate
Lieutenant Junior Grade Alpha Bate is another reinforcement pilot who served under Lieutenant Burning along with Monsha and Adel during the One-Year War. Although he is calmer and less obnoxious than Monsha, he has a tendency to encourage his friend's misbehavior, but that does not prevent him from being promoted to deputy commander of the mobile suit team. He and Monsha, plus the rest of the Albion's bridge crew are eventually drafted into the Titans. Voiced by: Kouji Totani (Japanese); Mike D'Gord (English)
Chap Adel
Ensign Chap Adel is the third reinforcement pilot assigned to the Albion and the most mild-mannered of the three. Voiced by: Yuji Mikimoto (Japanese); Jack Hammer (English)
Mora Bascht
Lieutenant Junior Grade Mora Bascht is a tall, big-boned female mechanic who serves as chief of maintenance on board the Albion and friend to Nina. She takes a liking to Chuck ever since she met him.Voiced by: Kazue Ikura (Japanese); Jane Alan (English)
Anavel Gato (アナベル・ガトー)
Lieutenant Commander Anavel Gato is a former member of the Principality of Zeon's elite palace guard unit. During the One Year War, at the Battle of Solomon, Gato earns the nickname "Nightmare of Solomon". He joins Aiguille Delaz's fleet late in the war, and departs with them when the war ends. He returns to Earth in October UC 0083 to seize the Gundam GP02A, and later uses this mobile suit's nuclear weapon against the Earth Federation's Naval Review in Episode 9. He dies in Episode 13 leading a suicide charge against the Earth Federation fleet after inputting the Island East colony's final impact point. Voiced by: Akio Ōtsuka (Japanese); Kirk Thornton (English)
Aiguille Delaz
A die-hard supporter of Gihren Zabi's ideals, self-promoted Vice-Admiral Aiguille Delaz was a colonel of a Zeon flotilla during the One Year War. He refuses to join the survivors retreating to Axis and spends the next three years in a secret colony base called Thorn Garden. He dies at Cima Garahau's hands in Episode 12 after encouraging Gato to push ahead with the colony drop. Voiced by: Kiyoshi Kobayashi (Japanese); Richard Barnes (English)
Cima Garahau
Cima Garahau is a commander of a group of former Zeon marines who are called upon by Delaz to help him execute Operation Stardust. It is later revealed that she is playing both sides. She pilots an MS-14Fs Gelgoog Marine and later the AGX-04 Gerbera Tetra. Voiced by: Mari Mashiba (Japanese); Carol Stanzione (English)
Kelly Layzner
Appearing in the sixth episode, Kelly Layzner is a former Zeon lieutenant who fought alongside Gato during the One Year War, ultimately losing his left arm. When Kou is beaten up by hoodlums in Von Braun City, Kelly helps him recover his mental faculties and the two become friends. However, the two of them are well aware that if they meet in battle, they will have no choice but to fight each other. He pilots the Val Varo mobile armor. Voiced by: Tesshō Genda (Japanese); Richard Epcar (English)
Opening/Insert:
Back to Paradise by Miki Matsubara (Episode 1)
Openings:
The Winner by Miki Matsubara (Episodes 2 to 7) - (There is also a later version of this song performed By Masaaki Endoh)
Men of Destiny by MIO (Episodes 8 to 12)
Endings:
Magic by Jacob Wheeler (Episodes 1 to 7)
Evergreen by MIO (Episodes 8 to 13 ~ In its full version in episode 13's ending)
True Shining by Rumiko Wada (Compilation movie ending)
Just before the completion of the Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory OVA in September 1992, the series was reformatted into a compilation movie which was released under the title Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: The Last Blitz of Zeon (ジオンの残光|Jion no Zankō). This feature opened in Japanese theaters on August 29, 1992.
To date, Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: The Last Blitz of Zeon has not been released in America (apparently due to the lack of original footage), however it has been released in France, Italy, Benelux, Germany, and received a UK DVD release in May 2006 as Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: The Afterglow Of Zeon. Bandai Visual announced the Blu-ray release of the movie in 2011.
A special VHS sneak peek of the first episode titled GxG Unit was given to advance ticket purchasers of Gundam F91.
The series was reissued in DVD format in Japan on four volumes; the first R2 disc went on sale on January 25, 2000.
Bandai Entertainment licensed the series for the US market. The series was released on VHS in dubbed and subtitled versions in 1999 to coincide with the Gundam Big Bang Project. It spanned 7 VHS volumes and was also available in a box set. Volume 1 of the R1 DVD went on sale in January 2002. Cartoon Network premiered the series on U.S. television a month later on its Adult Swim Action block, where it remained until November 2002. Due to the closure of Bandai Entertainment, the OVAs have been out-of-print. On October 11, 2014 at their 2014 New York Comic-Con panel, Sunrise announced they will be releasing all of the Gundam franchise, including Stardust Memory in North America through distribution via Right Stuf Inc., beginning in Spring 2015.
Bandai Visual released a DVD boxed set in Japan on May 27, 2011, as part of the series' 20th anniversary.
With the release of the original series in 1991, Bandai produced 1/144 kits of the GP-01 and GP-01-Fb Zephyranthes, GP-02 Physalis, GP-03 Dendrobium Stamen, and AGX-04 Gerbera Tetra. All five units were later released in the 1/144 HGUC line, which included a special version of the GP-02A with an MLRS launcher. Stardust Memory's HGUC line also has the GP-03 Dendrobium in 1/144 scale and in 1/550 scale alongside the Val-Varo and the Neue Ziel. At least six mobile suits from the series have been released either under Bandai's Master Grade or Perfect Grade lines. The GP-01 Zephyranthes and GP-01-Fb were released as part of the Real Grade line in 2013 while the original version of the AGX-04 Gerbera Tetra, the GP-04G Gerbera, was released in 2015 under the RE/100 line.
Gundam 0083's canon includes two radio dramas on CD format billed as Cinema CDs. Both drama CDs were directed by series director Takashi with dialogue by Asahide Ōkuma (writer for 5 of the 0083 episodes).
Runga Offing Cannonade Battle (ルンガ沖砲撃戦, Runga-Oki Hōgekisen)
Runga Offing narrates events between Episodes 7 and 8, when the Albion engages a Chivvay-class Zeon warship. It introduces a new character, Aristide Hughes, the Albion's Gunnery Lieutenant.
Mayfly of Space (宇宙の蜉蝣, Uchū no Kagerō)
Mayfly reveals Cima's backstory in flashbacks as she reflects on her past prior to the events of Episode 13. It reveals that Cima and her unit poisoned a Side 5 colony using G-3 nerve gas, under orders, but were treated as pariahs afterwards by their own countrymen for committing such an atrocity. At the end of the war her superior refused to let her retreat to Axis. Because their home colony Mahal had been converted into a weapon, Cima and her men were left stranded and homeless.
Both of these stories appear in the PlayStation 2 game Mobile Suit Gundam: Encounters in Space.
Kadokawa Shoten released a three-part novelization of the series. Penned by Hiroshi Yamaguchi, the books contain illustrations by Toshihiro Kawamoto, Hirotoshi Sano and Hajime Katoki.
Viz Communications also released all episodes in a comic book format from 1994 to 1995. However, instead of a manga, they used screenshots from each episode for the panels. Line art and descriptions of all units were inserted as well.
