Frederic Wilhelm C.J. Sjöström (born 8 January 1987) is an English actor and model of Swedish and German descent, best known for playing Cormac McLaggen in the Harry Potter film series and Luke in the 2012 musical comedy film A Cinderella Story: Once Upon a Song. He starred as Adam Cromwell on the dramedy series UnREAL, which premiered on Lifetime in June 2015. He starred as Brit Vayner in the 2016 Michael Bay war film, 13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi. In 2016, he plays Dickon Tarly in the sixth season of the HBO fantasy drama series Game of Thrones and H.G. Wells in the ABC upcoming series, Time After Time.
Stroma was born in London, England, to father Stefan Sjöström, a Swedish-born computer industry executive, and German mother Crystal Sjöström, and grew up in Ascot, England in the East Berkshire county, about 25 miles west of London. He was educated at the public boys'-only boarding school Radley College in Oxfordshire, graduating in 2005. He has an older sister, Antonia Sjöström and a younger brother, Philipp Sjöström.
When he was 16, Stroma was accepted to the National Youth Theatre of Great Britain. He had roles on various British TV shows, including Casualty and BBC's detective show, Mayo (aka The Gil Mayo Mysteries). While studying neuroscience at University College London, Stroma continued to work as an actor and model. He ended up taking a year off from university to play the role of Cormac McLaggen in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince. After filming was over, Stroma completed his degree at University College London. In 2009, he attained a 2:1 BSc (an upper-second-class degree) in Neuroscience.
After graduating from college, Stroma was cast in the role as Cormac McLaggen first in Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince and then in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Parts 1 and 2.
Stroma played the role of Cool Brett in the crime-thriller film 4.3.2.1.
Stroma appeared in the direct to DVD romantic film A Cinderella Story: Once Upon A Song as a British student, Luke Morgan. He played opposite Lucy Hale as her love interest.
He had a minor role in Pitch Perfect, a 2012 comedy about the world of collegiate a cappella. He played a radio station manager at the local college radio station.
In 2014, he was cast in the role of Jack in the psychological thriller After the Dark, which was formerly known as The Philosophers, with his former Harry Potter co-star Bonnie Wright. The film was shot on location in Jakarta.
In June 2015, Stroma was one of the romantic interests, Adam Cromwell, in the Lifetime dramedy UnREAL. He plays British bachelor who is competing on a fictionalized The Bachelor-type reality show called Everlasting. Stroma's character is manipulated as much as the women who are vying for his attention in the show that is a behind-the-scenes view of reality dating shows.
UnREAL was picked up for a second season but Stroma had said that he does not think his character will be back, though during a Paley Center panel on UnREAL he said that he is hopeful as the show will continue to feature Everlasting. After the season 1 finale, Sarah Gertrude Shapiro, one of the co-creators of UnREAL, confirmed that Stroma would be back in season 2.
Stroma had a role in the Michael Bay film, 13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi (2016), playing Yale University graduate student Brit Vayner, an undercover CIA officer in Libya.
In 2016 he joined the cast of the HBO series Game of Thrones in Season 6 as Dickon Tarly, the brother of Samwell Tarly.
Stroma said he modeled (and acted) to help pay for college. He modelled for Acne Underwear in their Underwear Collection Autumn/Winter 2008.
He uses Stroma as a surname instead of Sjöström because there is an NHL player named Fredrik Sjöström.
Stroma plays guitar and can sing but he is not classically trained in either.
Stroma began dating his co-star from UnREAL, Johanna Braddy, in summer 2015. Stroma and Braddy became engaged in May 2016. 
