Alice Sophia Eve (born 6 February 1982) is an English actress.
Eve was born in London, the daughter of actors Trevor Eve and Sharon Maughan. She attended Bedales School, and More House School, and then took her A-levels at Westminster School in London.
During her gap year, she studied at the Beverly Hills Playhouse and then read English at St Catherine's College, Oxford. While at Oxford, she appeared in student productions of The Importance of Being Earnest, Animal Crackers (which toured to the Edinburgh Festival Fringe), Scenes from an Execution and The Colour of Justice.
Eve has appeared in television dramas such as the BBC's The Rotters' Club, Agatha Christie's Poirot and Hawking and starred in the film Stage Beauty (2004).
In 2006, she starred in two comedy films: Starter for 10 and Big Nothing (in which she and co-star Simon Pegg put on American accents). She spent the early part of 2006 in India working on a drama mini-series Losing Gemma about backpackers.
On the stage, Eve has appeared in two plays directed by Trevor Nunn. In 2006, she played young Esme/Alice in the new Tom Stoppard play Rock 'n' Roll, at the Royal Court Theatre, later reprising her role for the 2007 Broadway transfer. For this performance, she was nominated for the best supporting actress award at the Whatsonstage.com Theatregoers' Choice Awards.
In 2009, she played Roxane in a production of Cyrano de Bergerac at the Chichester Festival Theatre.
In 2010, Eve played the female lead role in the American romantic comedy film She's Out of My League, in which her parents play the roles of her character's parents. She also played the role of Erin, Charlotte's Irish nanny, in Sex and the City 2.
During 2011, Eve had a recurring guest role in season 8 of the HBO series Entourage, as Sophia, a journalist and love interest to Vincent Chase. 2011 Eve also portrayed Hollywood actress Lara Tyler in the romantic comedy The Decoy Bride. Eve is best known for her role of Dr. Carol Marcus in Star Trek Into Darkness.
Eve took part in the opening session of the 2013 Consumer Electronics Show. She also appeared in Paul McCartney's music video "Queenie Eye".
In 2013, she co-starred in Before We Go with Chris Evans, who also directed the film. She played herself in the Hollywood film Night at the Museum: Secret of the Tomb in 2014 and has since starred in several productions, including Criminal in 2016.
She was in a long-term relationship with poet Adam O'Riordan, whom she met while reading English at Oxford. The pair broke up in 2012.
On 14 August 2014, Eve announced her engagement to her "high school sweetheart", financier Alex Cowper-Smith. The pair met while attending Westminster School in London. They married on 31 December 2014.
She has heterochromia; her left eye is blue, and her right eye is green.
Eve currently lives in London and Los Angeles. Eve is of English, Welsh, and Irish descent.
In 2015, Eve aroused controversy with her comments on Caitlyn Jenner's public transition from man to woman, when she accused Jenner of "playing at being a woman".
