Georgina Helen "Georgie" Henley (born 9 July 1995) is an English actress. She is best known for her portrayal of Lucy Pevensie in The Chronicles of Narnia film series, for which she won the Phoenix Film Critics' Society Award for Best Performance by a Youth Female in a Lead or Supporting Role in The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe in 2005, at only ten years old.
Henley was born on 9 July 1995 to Helen and Mike Henley in Ilkley, West Yorkshire, where she attended Moorfield School for Girls before attending Bradford Grammar School. She has two older sisters, Rachael and Laura. Rachael played the older version of Lucy Pevensie in The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe.
Henley made her acting debut as Lucy Pevensie in 2005 film The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe, based on the C.S. Lewis novel The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. The film grossed over $745 million worldwide. Henley has won the Phoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Performance by a Youth Female in a Lead or Supporting Role and the Young Artist Award for Best Performance in a Feature.
Henley reprised her role of Lucy Pevensie in The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe, 2008 sequel The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian and 2010 sequel The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader.
Since the release of The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, Henley has appeared as Jane in the stage play Babes in the Wood put on by Upstagers' Theater Group, which ran from 27 January to 4 February 2006. She starred as Scaramouche in Bradford Grammar School's production of We Will Rock You, which ran from 13 to 16 March 2013. She also appeared as the young Jane Eyre in the 2006 BBC adaptation of Jane Eyre.
Henley appears as Beth in the crime-drama Perfect Sisters a film based on the story of two Canadian teenaged sisters who killed their mother. The film was released in April 2014.
Henley plays Mary Warren in The Sisterhood of Night. The film was released in April 2015.
During her time at University of Cambridge Henley performed on stage in Play It Again, Sam by Woody Allen; The Penelopiad by Margaret Atwood; The Trojan Women; A Clockwork Orange by Anthony Burgess; and in the CUADC/Footlights annual pantomime. Henley has also directed projects including Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street, and After Seymour (the latter of which she co-wrote). In 2016 she appeared in the stage productions of: Skylight by David Hare; Girl, Interrupted (an adaption of the book with the same name; and Swallow by Stef Smith. In the summer of 2014, Henley went to the Edinburgh Fringe Festival along with Cambridge Shortlegs, performing once again in The Penelopiad in the role of Eurycleia.
As of 2015, Henley is writing and directing her first short film, TIDE.
In late 2016, Henley will also star in the film Access All Areas starring as Nat.
Henley resides Ilkley, West Yorkshire, where she was a member of the Ilkley Upstagers' Theatre Group, and has finished her education at Bradford Grammar School. She graduated from Clare College, Cambridge with a Bachelor of Arts in English on June 22nd, 2016. She is a supporter of SOS Children's Villages, an international orphan charity providing homes and mothers for orphaned and abandoned children.
