Stephanie Caroline March (born (1974-07-23)July 23, 1974) is an American actress. She is best known for her role as Alexandra Cabot in the long-running NBC series, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit.
March was born in Dallas, Texas, the daughter of John and Laura March, and has a sister, Charlotte. She attended McCulloch Middle School in Highland Park, and Highland Park High School, where Law & Order's Angie Harmon, who also played the role of an assistant district attorney on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit attended concurrently. After her parents' divorce, her mother married Robert Derby. In 1996, March graduated from Northwestern University, where she was a member of Kappa Alpha Theta sorority.
At Northwestern University, she played Helena in A Midsummer Night's Dream in Chicago, where she continued to pursue her stage career. In 1997, she made her screen debut in an episode of CBS series, Early Edition. In 1999, March moved to New York and made her Broadway debut in the highly acclaimed production of Arthur Miller's Death of a Salesman, opposite Brian Dennehy. She later co-starred in the television film Death of a Salesman, based on the play. In 2000, she also performed in the Broadway premiere of Eric Bogosian's Talk Radio, starring Liev Schreiber, in 2007. She also starred in Howard Korder's Boy's Life alongside Jason Biggs.
In 2003, March made her film debut with a supporting role in the political comedy Head of State opposite Chris Rock. She later appeared in the films Mr. & Mrs. Smith, The Treatment, and Falling for Grace, the latter two romantic comedies. March also appeared in the 2009 film The Invention of Lying as the woman Ricky Gervais's character tells the world will end unless she has sex with him. She later co-starred in the independent films Why Stop Now? and Innocence.
On television, March guest starred on 30 Rock, Grey's Anatomy, Rescue Me, and Happy Endings. She was regular cast member on the short-lived CBS legal comedy-drama, Made in Jersey in 2012, but left the series after the pilot episode.
March is best known for her role as Assistant District Attorney Alexandra Cabot on the NBC crime legal drama series, Law & Order: Special Victims Unit, a role she played from 2000 to 2003. She departed in the season 5 episode "Loss", when Cabot is shot and placed in witness protection. She returned to the series for a six-episode arc in season 10 and then continued as a main character in season 11. After her departure near the end of season 11, she returned again in season 13 as a recurring character.
March reprised her role as Cabot, now the Bureau Chief ADA of the homicide bureau, on the short-lived NBC courtroom drama Conviction, which debuted in spring 2006. The show, which was part of the Law & Order universe, only lasted one 13-episode season before being cancelled.
March married celebrity chef Bobby Flay on February 20, 2005. She has appeared on four of Flay's Food Network shows—Boy Meets Grill, Grill It! with Bobby Flay, Iron Chef America, and Throwdown with Bobby Flay—as a guest judge. According to media reports, March and Flay separated in March 2015 and their divorce was finalized on July 17, 2015.
March became a celebrity ambassador to World of Children Awards in January 2010. Additionally, she has served as a board member for Safe Horizon, an advocacy organization for victims of crime and abuse.
March is an advocate for women's rights and a supporter of Planned Parenthood. In 1938, her great-grandmother, Ruby Webster March, founded the West Texas Mother's Health Center, which later became part of Planned Parenthood of West Texas.
March wrote an essay, published in June 2016, that detailed her experience with breast augmentation surgery in 2014, and the subsequent removal of the implants due to infection.
