Clémence Poésy (French: [klemɑ̃s pɔezi]; born 3 October 1982 as Clémence Guichard) is a French actress and fashion model. After starting on the stage as a child, Poésy studied drama and has been active in both film and television since 1999, including some English-language productions. She is known for the roles of Fleur Delacour in the Harry Potter film series, Chloë in In Bruges, Rana in 127 Hours and Natasha Rostova in War and Peace.
Born in L'Haÿ-les-Roses, a southern suburb of Paris, she is the daughter of actor-writer Étienne Guichard and a French teacher. Poésy took her mother's maiden name as her stage name. She was sent to an alternative school in Meudon. Her father gave Poésy her first acting job when she was a child; then she had two lines at age 14. She has a younger sister, Maëlle Poésy-Guichard, who is also an actress.
Since leaving La Source – the bilingual alternative school she attended until the age of 16 – Poésy has studied drama at Conservatoire National Supérieur d'Art Dramatique (CNSAD) (French National Academy of Dramatic Arts), the Atelier International de Blanche Salant et Paul Weaver, and the University of Nanterre.
Her first English-speaking role was in the BBC mini-series Gunpowder, Treason & Plot (2004), in which she portrayed Mary, Queen of Scots, subsequently winning the 2005 Golden FIPA for actress in a TV Series and Serial.
In 2005 Poésy appeared in the Harry Potter franchise as Fleur Delacour in The Goblet of Fire, and between 2006 and 2007 she starred in a number of film and television productions including the 2007 mini-series War and Peace.
In 2008 Poésy starred in the Academy Award-nominated film In Bruges, where she acted alongside Colin Farrell, and reunited with Harry Potter co-stars Ralph Fiennes and Brendan Gleeson. In 2009, Poésy appeared in Heartless opposite Jim Sturgess. She reprised her role as Fleur Delacour in both Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows movies.
As a model, Poésy has been featured in magazines, including the covers of i-D, twice on French magazine Jalouse, Australia's Yen, and Nylon. Since October 2007, Poésy has been one of three spokesmodels for the self-titled fragrance by Chloé, and has modelled in Gap's 2008 autumn advertising campaign. In December 2011, Clémence was chosen as the face of G-Star Raw.
She played Chuck Bass's new French girlfriend, Eva, in the fourth season of the CW hit show Gossip Girl. In 2010, Poésy also appeared alongside James Franco in 127 Hours, directed by Danny Boyle. 127 Hours was screened at the Toronto International Film Festival on 12 September 2010, following its premiere at the 2010 Telluride Film Festival.
In 2011 she appeared alongside Rupert Friend in Lullaby for Pi, a romantic drama and Benoit Philippon's directorial debut. The film is about a jazz singer (Friend) whose wife has just died and who meets a mysterious woman (Poésy). Forest Whitaker also starred.
She can also be heard singing on the album Colour of the Trap by Miles Kane. She is featured on the track "Happenstance".
She stars alongside Michael Caine in Mr. Morgan's Last Love and in 2012 made her Broadway debut in Cyrano de Bergerac as Roxane.
In 2013 Poésy starred as the female lead in the Sky Atlantic/Canal+ series The Tunnel.
In 2014 she became the poster girl for Love Story fragrance from Chloé.
Poésy is fluent in French, English, some Italian, and Spanish. In late 2015, Poésy announced her engagement to long-term boyfriend, the French actor, Emeric Glayse. The wedding is due to take place in the spring of 2016 in the actress's home town of L’Hay-les-Roses.
Chevalier of the Order of Arts and Letters (2015)
