Ray Donovan is an American television crime drama series created by Ann Biderman for Showtime. The twelve-episode first season premiered on June 30, 2013. The pilot episode broke records of viewership, becoming the biggest premiere of all time on Showtime. Showtime renewed the show for a fourth season, which premiered on June 26, 2016.
The show takes place in Los Angeles, California, where Irish-American Ray Donovan (Liev Schreiber), originally from South Boston, works for the powerful law firm Goldman & Drexler, representing the rich and famous. Donovan is a "Fixer": a person who arranges bribes, payoffs, threats, etc. to ensure the outcome of a given situation. Ray experiences his own problems when his father, Mickey Donovan (Jon Voight), is unexpectedly released from prison, and the FBI attempts to bring down Ray and his associates.
Liev Schreiber as Raymond "Ray" Donovan.
Paula Malcomson as Abby Donovan, Ray's wife.
Eddie Marsan as Terrence "Terry" Donovan, Ray's older brother. A former boxer, suffers from Parkinson's disease.
Dash Mihok as Brendan "Bunchy" Donovan, Ray's younger brother. Identifies himself as an alcoholic and a sexual anorexic.
Pooch Hall as Daryll Donovan, Ray's younger half-brother (via Mickey and Claudette). A professional boxer, trained by Terry, he also drives limos.
Steven Bauer as Avi Rudin, Ray's right-hand man. Former IDF soldier and ex-Mossad agent.
Katherine Moennig as Lena Barnum, Ray's investigative assistant.
Kerris Dorsey as Bridget Donovan, Ray's daughter.
Devon Bagby as Conor Donovan, Ray's son.
Jon Voight as Mickey Donovan, Ray's father.
Ray Donovan has met with positive reviews from critics. The first season holds a rating of 76% on Rotten Tomatoes, with the consensus reading: "Ray Donovan moves quickly between genres and tones, with Liev Schreiber and Jon Voight's performances making the whiplash worth it". On Metacritic, the show has a score of 75 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "generally positive reviews". Tim Goodman, writing for The Hollywood Reporter, said that "Showtime has another gem on their hands" and the casting of Liev Schreiber and Jon Voight was "gold".
In June 2013, the series was honored, along with five others, with the Critics' Choice Television Award for Most Exciting New Series.
In December 2013, the series earned two Golden Globe Award nominations, both for acting. Liev Schreiber was nominated for Best Actor in a Television Series — Drama and Jon Voight won for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries, or Television Film. In July 2014, Voight was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series at the 66th Primetime Emmy Awards.
The first season was released on DVD and Blu-ray on June 10, 2014. The second season was released on both media on May 26, 2015. The third season was released on both media on December 29, 2015.
