Tracy Lynn Middendorf (born January 26, 1970) is an American television, movie, and stage actress.
Middendorf was born in Miami Beach, Florida. She attended Pickens High School in Jasper, Georgia. In 1987, during her senior year, she left Jasper to take drama classes in Miami, and later attended SUNY Purchase. Middendorf is married to Franz Wisner, author of the well-received book Honeymoon with My Brother, and has two children.
Middendorf broke into television as Carrie Brady on the daytime soap opera Days of Our Lives in 1992, replacing Christie Clark until her return in 1993. Since then, she has made a career as a supporting actress in several movies and frequent episodic appearances on television, notably out-of-work actress Tina on the first episode of Angel, unfaithful fiancée Risa Helms in two episodes of Ally McBeal, broke young widow Adele in episode 1.2 of Six Feet Under, Steve's love interest and rape-accuser Laura Kingman in six episodes of Beverly Hills, 90210, and abused wife Carla Matheson in four episodes of 24. In 2005, she appeared as a worried mother in House and had a major role in El Cortez as Jack's girlfriend, Theda.
Middendorf just wrapped shooting on the pilot The Last Ship for TNT and wrapped shooting in Brazil for three months on the film The Art of Losing (Flores Raras). On stage, she was most recently seen at the Shakespeare Theatre Company in Old Times and Yale Repertory Theatre in Battle of Black and Dogs. She recently appeared in the first three seasons of Boardwalk Empire as Babette, the hostess and manager of the Atlantic City restaurant Babette's Supper Club.
Middendorf won an Ovation Award for her interpretation of Alma in Tennessee Williams' Summer and Smoke at the Fountain Theater in 1999, and starred opposite Craig T. Nelson as Muriel McComber in the 1998 Lincoln Center production of Ah, Wilderness!.
In April 2015, she won the American Movie Award as Best Actress for her performance in Snowflake, a critically acclaimed short film for which she also won the Diamond Award at the International Independent Film Awards, the Best Supporting Actress Award at the IndieFEST Film Awards 2016 and was nominated at the Los Angeles Independent Film Festival Awards
In 2015, Middendorf joined the cast of the MTV series Scream based on the Wes Craven smash thriller, as Margaret "Maggie" Duval, a coroner with a secret past that has caught up to her and her young teenage daughter, putting their lives at risk.
In 2012, Middendorf created Shutter To Think— a project designed to use photography as a way to support programs for girls around the world. Through the sale of personal photographs taken by well-known actors, writers, directors, and musicians, Shutter to Think is able to help fund programs with globally recognized organizations that are focused on providing opportunities to girls. Contributors include Steve Buscemi, Meryl Streep and Nicholas D. Kristof, among others.
