Candy is a 2006 Australian romantic drama film, adapted from Luke Davies's novel Candy: A Novel of Love and Addiction. Candy was directed by debut film-maker Neil Armfield and stars Heath Ledger, Abbie Cornish and Geoffrey Rush.
Candy, produced by Margaret Fink, was released in Australia on 25 May 2006 and subsequently released around the world.
A poet named Dan (Heath Ledger) falls in love with an art student named Candy (Abbie Cornish) who gravitates to his bohemian lifestyle – and his love of heroin. Hooked as much on one another as they are on the drug, their relationship is alternating states of oblivion, self-destruction, and despair.
The film is organized in 3 acts of roughly 3 scenes each, titled Heaven, Earth, and Hell:
In Heaven, the young lovers ecstatically experience sex and drugs. Constantly seeking drug money, they borrow from Candy's parents or eccentric university professor Casper (Geoffrey Rush), selling things, stealing, even prostituting when desperate.
In Earth they are married and confront the realities of addiction and family life. Dan purchases the drugs; Candy becomes a prostitute. Dan steals a credit card and gets the owner's PIN, then steals money from his bank funds. Candy becomes pregnant, and despite their efforts to "go clean", the baby is delivered stillborn at 23 weeks. They finally stop taking drugs with huge effort, going through agonizing withdrawal symptoms in the process. Despite poor living conditions, constant struggles for money, and frequent disputes, they love each other very much.
In Hell they experience the dissolution of their relationship and recovery. They choose to move to the country to "try methadone" as a way to ease into a more normal life. After a disastrous Sunday lunch, Candy fights with her parents, breaks down, and screams at them to leave. Eventually, she becomes involved with a neighbor, a fellow drug user, and relapses to her previous lifestyle. She has a complete mental breakdown and becomes extremely distant toward Dan. He looks up Casper again, but he has died of a drug overdose; this forces Dan to reconsider his life. While Candy recovers in a clinic, Dan gets clean and gets a dishwashing job. When Candy returns to Dan, he says "There's no going back. If you're given a reprieve, I think it's good to remember just how thin it is" and she stands up and leaves.
Abbie Cornish as Candy
Heath Ledger as Dan
Geoffrey Rush as Casper
Tom Budge as Schumann
Roberto Meza Mont as Jorge
Tony Martin as Jim Wyatt
Noni Hazlehurst as Elaine Wyatt
Tim McKenzie as Uncle Rod
Tara Morice as Aunt Katherine
Maddi Newling as Janey
Cristian Castillo as Little Angelo
Paul Blackwell as Phillip Dudley
Adrienne Pickering as Teller
Nathaniel Dean as Paul Hillman
Alicia Hannah as Neighbour
The film featured a version of the Tim Buckley song "Song to the Siren", sung by actress/singer Paula Arundell. It also includes the title track Sugar Man from the debut 1970 album by forgotten Detroit singer-songwriter Sixto Rodriguez.
The film holds a 49% rating on review site Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 5.8/10, based on 74 reviews. The critical consensus states that "Stars Heath Ledger and Abbie Cornish look better than they should as heroin addicts, and their characters are too absorbed and self-pitying to be totally compelling." 
2006 – Germany – Berlin International Film Festival
2006 – Hong Kong International Film Festival
2006 – Canada – Toronto International Film Festival
2006 – UK – BFI London Film Festival
2006 – USA – Milwaukee International Film Festival
2007 – Singapore – Singapore International Film Festival
Won:
2006 Australian Writers Guild Awards: Feature Film - Adaptation (Luke Davies with Neil Armfield).
2006 Film Critics Circle of Australia: Best Actress in a Lead Role (Abbie Cornish), Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Geoffrey Rush).
2006 Australian Screen Editors Ellie for Best Editing in a Feature Film Dany Cooper ASE
Nominated:
2006 Berlin International Film Festival: Golden Berlin Bear.
2006 Film Critics Circle of Australia: Best Actor in a Leading Role (Heath Ledger), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Noni Hazlehurst), Best Film, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Music Score (Paul Charlier).
2006 Australian Film Institute Awards: Best Film, Best Actress in a Leading Role (Abbie Cornish), Best Actor in a Leading Role (Heath Ledger), Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Geoffrey Rush), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Noni Hazlehurst), Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Editing, Best Production Design.
2006 Inside Film Awards: Best Actor (Heath Ledger), Best Actress (Abbie Cornish).
