Christy Carlson Romano (born Christy Michelle Romano; March 20, 1984) is an American actress and singer. She is known for her role Ren Stevens in the sitcom Even Stevens and as the voice of the title character Kim Possible in the animated series Kim Possible. She also was the voice of Yuffie Kisaragi in Kingdom Hearts and Final Fantasy VII Advent Children.
Romano was born in Milford, Connecticut, the youngest of four children to Anthony and Sharon. She began her career at six years old when she was cast in several national tours of Broadway shows, including Annie, The Will Rogers Follies with Keith Carradine, and The Sound of Music with Marie Osmond. She made her first feature film appearance in 1996 as a singing "Chiquita Banana" in Woody Allen's Everyone Says I Love You. She also appeared in Henry Fool (1997), and Looking for an Echo (2000).
Romano made her Broadway debut in 1998 as Mary Phagan in the musical Parade by Alfred Uhry and Jason Robert Brown. In 2002, Romano became the first person to act in three Disney Channel projects simultaneously, supplementing her work on Even Stevens with a starring role in Cadet Kelly, alongside Hilary Duff, and voice acting as the title character in Kim Possible. She was nominated for a Daytime Emmy for her work on Kim Possible. The show inspired an adventure scavenger hunt activity at Disney's Epcot which ran for over five years, as well as two Disney Channel movies Kim Possible: So the Drama and Kim Possible: A Sitch in Time. She voiced Yuffie Kisaragi in the English version of the movie Final Fantasy VII Advent Children, as well as in the Disney/Square game Kingdom Hearts.
Throughout her teens and twenties, Romano starred in movies for ABC Family and Disney Channel, including Campus Confidential, Taking Five, The Cutting Edge: Going for the Gold, and The Cutting Edge: Chasing the Dream. Various other appearances include MTV's Kaya, CBS's Joan of Arcadia, The WB's Summerland, and TNT's Hawthorne.
In February 2004, Romano began a 31-week run as Belle in Disney's Beauty and the Beast on Broadway. In September 2008, she joined the Broadway company of Avenue Q as Kate Monster for several weeks.
She starred as Michelle off-Broadway in White's Lies at New World Stages in 2010, alongside Betty Buckley and Tuc Watkins.
Romano penned a novel, Grace's Turn, for Disney literary subsidiary Hyperion, which received accolades by the New York Public Library (NYPL) as the 2007 Teenage Book of the Year. In 2012, she directed a music video for Steph Gold's "THE SUN" which was accepted into the Los Angeles Shorts Fest 2012.
In March 2016, Christy will embark on her directorial debut with the holiday film Christmas All Over Again starring Nickelodeon star Sean Ryan Fox and YouTube star Todrick Hall. The film is set to be distributed before Christmas 2016.
While working at Disney, Romano recorded songs as part of soundtracks for Kim Possible and other Disney projects. She first sang on the Disney Channel on a musical episode of Even Stevens which led to more singing on the series and with Disney in general. In 2004, Walt Disney Records released Romano's debut album Greatest Disney TV & Film Hits. After her Broadway run of Beauty and the Beast Romano signed a record deal with Jason Flom at Atlantic Records. Flom was fired before Romano released her first album and Romano's deal was not honored. She continued to write music with Kara DioGuardi and The Matrix and placed her songs in several movies.
Romano and producer Brendan Rooney met in February 2011 while she was studying at Barnard College. They became engaged nine months later, and married on December 31, 2013 at the Banff Springs Hotel in Banff, Alberta. In June 2016, the couple announced that they were expecting their first child, a daughter, due in late 2016.
Greatest Disney TV & Film Hits (2004)
Shared Songs (in order of when released):
Soundtracks
