Betty is a French movie directed by Claude Chabrol based on the homonymous novel by Georges Simenon. It was first released in France in 1992.
Betty (Marie Trintignant), a young alcoholic woman, is caught cold while cheating on her bourgeois husband. Wasting no time, he and his family arrange a quick divorce settlement, ousting her from home and keeping her away from the two children the couple have. One night she ends up in a restaurant called Le Trou (The Hole), where she meets Laure (Stéphane Audran), an older woman, an alcoholic herself. Laure decides to take care of Betty after hearing the heart-breaking stories of her being a victim of a rich and ruthless society. Betty receives care and friendship from Laure, who's in a relationship with Mario (Jean-Francois Garreaud), the restaurant's owner. The envy toward Laure for Mario grows each day and will drive Betty to artfully contrive the means to conquer her new friend's lover. Laure realizes she has made a mistake by trusting her new friend and things soon begin to tremble between them. Betty's true colors are now visible and she sees her life at a point of no return, as she selfishly stomped on the last chance she had been given to be a better person.
Marie Trintignant - Betty Etamble
Stéphane Audran - Laure
Jean-François Garreaud - Mario
Yves Lambrecht - Guy Etamble
Christiane Minazzoli - Madame Etamble
Pierre Vernier - Le médecin
Pierre Martot - Frédéric
Thomas Chabrol - Schwartz
Yves Verhoeven - Philippe
Journalist Lawrence O'Toole from Entertainment Weekly defined Marie Trintignant's performance "Smashing". EW's vote was a B+. In the Chicago Sun Times Roger Ebert describes the film as a story of intertwined surprises, a film that doesn't have a plot per-se. The story is a chain reaction of events as this is the story of a woman who keeps tripping in her own faults and reckless behavior. Megan Rosenfeld, staff writer at The Washington Post, appears to have found Marie Trintignant's performance a tad empty besides the contribution she gives to the movie through her beauty.
