Ma vie en rose (English translation: My Life in Pink) is a 1997 Belgian drama film directed by Alain Berliner. It tells the story of Ludovic, a child who is seen by family and community as a boy, but consistently communicates being a girl. The film depicts Ludovic's family struggling to accept this transgressive gender expression. The film was selected as the Belgian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 70th Academy Awards, but was not accepted as a nominee.
When the Fabre family move into their dream house with wonderful neighbors, everything seems perfect except for one thing – the youngest child Ludovic wishes to function as a girl; while he was assigned 'male' at birth, he feels that he is a girl and wants to live as a female. The rest of the family humor him as best they can, rationalizing that Ludovic is only trying to find his identity and will soon be over it .
Trouble begins when Ludovic befriends Jérôme, the son of her father's boss, and expresses a desire to marry him when Ludovic is finally a girl. When visiting Jérôme's house, Ludovic enters his sister's room and puts on one of her dresses, not realizing that the sister is deceased and the room was merely kept in memory of her. Jérôme's mother sees this and she and the rest of the neighbors are horrified. The community turns against Ludovic and, by extension, the rest of the Fabre family. After Ludovic stands in as Snow White in a school play, the parents of the other students send in a petition to have her expelled. Ludovic's father, under strain as an employee of Jérôme's father, is unable to cope and causes conflict within the family. After a particularly bad argument, Ludovic attempts to mend the situation by hiding in a freezer to commit suicide. He is found in time and allowed to wear a skirt to a neighborhood party. While the other neighbors greet him warmly, Ludo's father gets fired the next day and finds his house spray painted with graffiti. Ludo runs out of the house, distraught. Hanna, Ludovic's mother, gets furious at Ludo for saying that. She blames Ludovic for everything that has gone wrong. Hanna wants to set Ludo straight, so she cuts his hair to make him look like his brothers. Ludo grows resentment towards his mother for doing this, ultimately deciding that he wants to live with his grandmother.
When Ludo and his grandmother go visit Ludo's parents one weekend, the father announces that he has a new job, but it is out of town, and that they have to move.
At their new house, Ludovic is befriended by Christine "Chris" Delvigne, a young girl whose mother sees him as such, but prefers to be seen as a boy. Chris' mother invites Ludovic to Chris' dress-up birthday party, which Ludo attends in a musketeer outfit. Chris, unhappy in a princess outfit, asks Ludo to swap and has the other young party guests force Ludo to do so upon refusal. When Ludovic's mother sees him in the dress, she fears that their troubles are beginning again and lashes out by hitting Ludo until the other party guests restrain her.
Hanna follows Ludovic to a billboard where she is shocked to see Ludovic in the picture, running away with Pam, the protagonist of a program he used to watch. When she tries to follow, she falls through the ground and awakens at home. She and Ludovic's father assure Ludo that he may wear skirts if he wishes, in turn he assures his mother that he never really intended to run away with Pam.
Georges Du Fresne as Ludovic "Ludo" Fabre
Michèle Laroque as Hanna Fabre
Jean-Philippe Écoffey as Pierre Fabre
Hélène Vincent as Élisabeth
Daniel Hanssens as Albert
Laurence Bibot as Lisette
Jean-François Gallotte as Jeannot
Julien Rivière as Jérôme
Gregory Diallo as Thom Fabre
Erik Cazals De Fabel as Jean Fabre
Cristine Barget as Zoé Fabre
Delphine Cadet as Pam
Raphaelle Santini as Christine "Chris" Delvigne
Marine Jolivet as Fabienne Delvigne
Anne Coesens as Teacher
Vincent Grass as Principal
The film's title may be intended as a reference to the song "La Vie en rose" where being en rose (in pink) means being in love; in the film, it refers to Ludovic's female gender identity.
The film features a fictional fashion doll brand, Le monde de Pam; this brand is fashioned after the similar, yet real, doll line, Barbie.
Chris, Ludovic's counterpart, near the end of the film has the same given name as screenwriter Chris Vander Stappen, who has written and directed several films involving lesbian relationships.
Although internationally presented as a Belgian film because of the nationality of Berliner, its director and co-screenwriter, the film is an international co-production between companies in Belgium, the United Kingdom and France – the majority of the production work was done by the French independent film house Haut et Court and the shooting took place south of Paris, France, near the commune of Évry.
The color timing in the film is significant – it changes as parents exit from the school play, switching to cold-blue tones.
In the United States the film received an R rating by the Motion Picture Association of America, an unusual decision because the film has minimal sexual content, minimal violence, and mild language. Those opposed to the rating believe that the rating was the result of transphobia.
The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film. It also won the Crystal Globe award at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival.
Childhood gender nonconformity
Cross-dressing in film and television
Gender identity
List of submissions to the 70th Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film
List of Belgian submissions for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Transgender
Transgender in film and television
