Samantha Bond (born 27 November 1961) is an English actress, best known for her role as Miss Moneypenny in the James Bond films during the Pierce Brosnan years. She is also known for her role as meddlesome wealthy Lady Rosamund Painswick in Downton Abbey, spanning from 2010–15, who appeared in a number of episodes including the final episode of the final series. Bond has also grown prominent from her role as the unreliable Auntie Angela in the BBC comedy Outnumbered, Bond appeared in the whole show performing in each of the series from 2007–14. Bond also receives notable mention as the original Ms. Liz Probert in Rumpole of the Bailey in 1987. Bond has appeared in the ITV Series Home Fires in which she reappears as the inspirationally intelligent Frances Barden, the leader of Cheshire WI during the Second World War. Bond has had a career featuring on both ITV and BBC shows as she appeared on Agatha Christie's Poirot and Miss Marple in two different roles, her most prominent appearance on BBC being in the role of the heartless alien Mrs. Wormwood in The Sarah Jane Adventures. Bond also appeared on the high rating TV movie Emma as Mrs. Weston.
Samantha Bond is the daughter of actor Philip Bond and TV producer Pat Sandys, and is the sister of the actress Abigail Bond and the journalist Matthew Bond. She was brought up in London, in homes in Barnes and St Margarets. She attended the Godolphin and Latymer School, and trained at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School.
Bond has appeared in many television series. Her first was as Maria Rushworth, née Bertram, in the 1983 BBC mini-series adaptation of Jane Austen's Mansfield Park. A later notable role, in which she returned to the world of Jane Austen, was as the titular heroine's close friend (and former governess) Miss Taylor in the 1996 adaptation of Emma starring Kate Beckinsale. She is a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company and starred opposite Dame Judi Dench in David Hare's award-winning play Amy's View at the Royal National Theatre.
In 1983, she appeared in the original Southampton production of Daisy Pulls It Off before it moved to the West End. Also in 1983 she appeared in Mansfield Park and in the fourth series of Rumpole of the Bailey, where she played Rumpole's pupil 'Mizz' Liz Probert. In 1985, she appeared in the BBC's adaptation of A Murder is Announced',' a Miss Marple mystery by Agatha Christie.
In 1989, she starred in the television adaptation of Oswald Wynd's novel The Ginger Tree. She played Mary MacKenzie, a young Scottish woman who finds disillusionment, love and heartbreak, in turn of the century Japan. It spans the time from 1903 to the outbreak of the Second World War. She also had a featured role in Erik the Viking, which starred Tim Robbins, Eartha Kitt and Mickey Rooney. In 1990, she appeared in the Agatha Christie's Poirot television series episode "The Adventure of the Cheap Flat." In 1992, she also appeared in the "Inspector Morse" television series – 6th, episode 1 ("Dead on time" as Helen Marriat). In 2004, she starred opposite Peter Davison in the ITV drama-comedy Distant Shores. In 2006, she returned to the stage in a new production of Michael Frayn's Donkey's Years at the Comedy Theatre.
On 1 January 2007, Bond appeared as the villain Mrs. Wormwood in the pilot episode of the BBC children's drama series The Sarah Jane Adventures, a spin-off from the popular science fiction series Doctor Who. She later reprised this role for "Enemy of the Bane," the two-part finale of the show's second series. She guest starred in Midsomer Murders in three episodes: "Destroying Angel" (2001) and "Shot at Dawn" (2008) and again in Neil Dudgeon's 2011 debut as lead character, in the episode "Death in the Slow Lane." In the West End she starred in David Leveaux's production of Tom Stoppard's Arcadia at the Duke of York's Theatre (2009).
From 2007–14, Bond has appeared as the recurring character of Sue's sister, Auntie Angela in the BBC semi-improvised comedy Outnumbered, alongside Hugh Dennis, Claire Skinner and David Ryall. In series one (2007) she appeared in the episodes "The Special Bowl," "The City Farm," "The Quiet Night In," "The Mystery Illness" and "The Dinner Party." In series two (2008), Bond only appeared in the first episode "The Wedding." In series three (2010), Bond appeared in the episode "The Restaurant." Bond also starred in series four (2011) for the final two episodes "The Cold Caller" and "The Exchange Student" and returned in series five for the final episode of the show which aired on 5 March 2014. Angela is a self-centred new age woman who has no job and no real life apart from helping herself, she tries to help her dad but leaves when things get hard. Following Outnumbered Bond gained a role in the West End production of Dirty Rotten Scoundrels, Bond became a main role in the musical production with the character of "Muriel". The production began on 2 April 2014 and ended on 7 March. During the show Bond performed numerous songs "What Was a Woman To Do", "Like Zis/Like Zat" and the Finale. Bond met with a favourable review from Radio Times as the critic called her "stage royalty".
Bond appeared as Lady Rosamund Painswick in the worldwide television series of Downton Abbey, Rosamund was the sister of Robert the Earl of Grantham. Bond's character Painswick was close with Robert's middle daughter Edith who was portrayed by Laura Carmichael. Bond appeared in all of the series and overall in 18 episodes; Bond also appeared in the finale episode of the whole series. Bond first made an appearance to the show during Series 1 2010 making her premiere appearance during the finale of the series, Episode 7. Bond then came back in Series 2 during 2011 in Episode 2 and Episode 3, Bond also appeared in the first Downton Abbey Christmas Special
Bond featured in the ITV show of Home Fires as the clever and kind Frances Barden. The show centres around the life and troubles faced by the women on the Home Front; however despite the men being away Frances and her allies rally the small village to fight for the men by growing produce, making food and funding servics like ambulances. Following successful ratings from Series 1 Home Fires was renewed for a second series due to air in April 2016.
Samantha Bond starred as Miss Moneypenny all throughout Pierce Brosnan's tenure as James Bond 007 which began in 1994 and ended in 2005. She was preceded by Caroline Bliss and Lois Maxwell. She was Miss Moneypenny to Pierce Brosnan's James Bond for his four 007 films which were GoldenEye, Tomorrow Never Dies, The World Is Not Enough and Die Another Day. In a BBC interview, she remarked that she would retire from the role should Pierce Brosnan step down as the lead.
In an advert for London's 2012 Olympic bid, Bond once again appeared as Miss Moneypenny. She appeared alongside Roger Moore, who played agent 007 between 1973 and 1985.
The role of Miss Moneypenny was not cast in the following Bond films, Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace. The character eventually returned in Skyfall under the alias 'Eve', played by Naomie Harris.
She lives in St Margarets, London and is married to Alexander Hanson with whom she has two children, Molly and Tom.
