Alexis Texas (born May 25, 1985) is an American pornographic actress, director, and feature dancer. She first performed with Jack Venice in Shane's World's College Amateur Tour In Texas, filmed in October 2006, followed by several of scenes for Bang Bros in Florida. In 2010, she was named by Maxim as one of the 12 top female stars in porn. She has received several awards for her performances
As a military brat, Texas was born on an Army base in Panama. She was raised in the San Antonio metropolitan area in Texas. She is of German, Norwegian, and Puerto Rican descent. Her first job was at a nursing home, where she worked as a personal care assistant. Prior to entering the adult film industry, she was attending college for respiratory care therapy.
Texas' first scene was with Jack Venice in Shane's World's College Amateur Tour In Texas, filmed in October 2006, followed by several scenes for Bang Bros in Florida. She then moved to Los Angeles and began shooting scenes for the LA Direct modeling agency in March 2007. Released in February 2008, Discovering Alexis Texas was directed by the adult actress Belladonna.
In 2012, Texas signed an exclusive one-year contract with the company Adam & Eve. In February 2014, it was announced that she had amicably separated from Adam & Eve.
Texas is part of a touring feature dance duo called T&A alongside Teagan Presley. She currently has a show on Vivid Radio titled Alexis Texas: Booty Talk. In June 2015, Elegant Angel signed her to an exclusive directing contract. Her directorial debut, Big Booty Tryouts, was released the following month. She appeared in all of the film's scenes, which were the first ones she shot after a nearly two-year hiatus from performing. She also directed The Real Buttwoman Returns, which features her first gangbang scene.
She featured on the cover of Genesis magazine in April 2009, and Hustler magazine's 35th anniversary edition in June 2009. In 2010, she was named by Maxim as one of the 12 top female stars in porn.
In 2013 she was one of the 16 actresses portrayed in Deborah Anderson's documentary film Aroused.
In 2011, she made her crossover debut to mainstream movies starring in the comedy horror film Bloodlust Zombies. In 2012, she appeared in the music video for "Bandz a Make Her Dance" by Juicy J.
She was married to pornographic actor, Mr. Pete from 2008 to 2013.
