Oggy and the Cockroaches (known as Oggy et les Cafards in French, often referred to as Oggy) is a French animated comedy series produced by Xilam and Gaumont Film Company.
The show centers on Oggy, an anthropomorphic blue cat, who would prefer to spend his days contentedly watching television and eating - if not for the three roaches in the household: Joey, Dee Dee and Marky (named after members of the punk group Ramones). The trio seems to enjoy making Oggy's life miserable, which involves mischief ranging from (in most cases) plundering his refrigerator to such awkward things like hijacking the train Oggy just boarded. Oggy usually finds creatures accompanying him to the end of the episode, such as crabs, clams, a horse, a very technologically advanced child, a puppy, and an octopus. However, it's not always Oggy who wins.
The cartoon relies on slapstick humour, much like its "ancestor", Tom and Jerry, only amplifying the level of extremities up a notch. While traditional slapstick cartoon characters prefer dropping anvils and pianos on each other, this show sometimes uses buses or submarines. Despite these, however, most gags are easily accessible and enjoyable for younger viewers. Since dialogue is kept to a minimum, the humour is entirely visual.
An album, Oggy et les Cafards : Le Show du Chat, was released in France on CD and for digital download on 6 September 2010.
A CD drama, Oggy et les Cafards Volume 1, was released in France on CD and for digital download in October, 2012. It contains narrations of five episodes by Anthony Kavanagh.
A French comic series is adapted from the cartoon, first started out in 2010. It is published by Dargaud, written by Diego Aranega, drawn and colourised by Frévin, also known as Sylvain Frécon.
16 April 2010 : Plouf, prouf, vrooo !
5 November 2010 : Crac, boum, miaouuuuu !
23 September 2011 : Bip...bip...bip...
Five DVDs came out in 2003 within the United States, with 12 episodes each. In 2005, several VHS's were released in NYC.
On 8 October 2008, a French DVD boxset of the complete first series plus the pilot and the episode Working Cat, is available. On 6 September 2010, three French DVD boxsets of the complete first series, of the complete second series and of the complete third series are available. On July 2011, a French DVD boxset containing all episodes from seasons 1, 2 and 3 became available and later on few days the most channel programs and videos viewed from India Hyderabad uppal centre city the program had been become an focus and exhausted channel.
A magazine version, called Oggy et les Cafards, le mag came out in France in 2009 (2 issues), then again in 2011.
n°1 : 11 July 2009
n°2 : 21 October 2009
n°3: 14 January 2011
Season 5 is planned for release in 2017.
The film Oggy and the Cockroaches: The Movie (originally Oggy et les Cafards, Le Film) was released to theatres on August 7, 2013.
Oggy and the Cockroaches originates in France where it aired on networks France 3, Canal+, and Gulli.
It aired in Algeria on A3 and Chaîne 4, in Argentina on Fox Kids Latin America and Cartoon Network Latin America, in Australia on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's ABC1 and ABC3 networks, in Belgium on Ketnet. Also, it is airing in Bosnia and Herzegovina on Televizija Kantona Sarajevo and FTV, in Brazil on Fox Kids Latin America, Cartoon Network Latin America and Rede Globo, in Canada on YTV and Vrak.tv (now Vrak), in Chile on Cartoon Network Latin America, Fox Kids Latin America and La Red, in Costa Rica on Cartoon Network Latin America, Fox Kids Latin America and Teletica and in Croatia on HRT1. Thirdly, it airs in the Czech Republic on Prima Love and TV Nova, in Denmark on DR1 and DR Ramasjang and in Finland on Nelonen and Subtv Juniori (now MTV Juniori).'
Oggy and the Cockroaches even aired on NBC.
Super RTL aired Oggy and the Cockroaches for the area of Germany. Alter Channel also aired the series in Greece, with Jetix following suit. However, as of 2009, Jetix has ceased operations, and as of December 2011, Alter Channel also has ceased operations as well. As such, Oggy and the Cockroaches currently no longer airs in Greece.
For the Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand and South Korea areas, Cartoon Network Asia and Disney Channel Asia aired the series. Meanwhile, it aired in Hungary on M1, however, as of March 15, 2015, M1 now operates a news channel.
It was also aired in India by Nickelodeon India from 2009 right up until 2012 when it dropped out of Nickelodeon India's schedule and migrated to Cartoon Network India but when Cartoon Network India stopped airing old episode and replaced it with new episodes, Nickelodeon India again aired Old episodes. Later it was picked up by Sonic Nickelodeon also. So, in India, Oggy and the Cockroaches currently airs in Cartoon Network India, Nickelodeon India and Sonic Nickelodeon.
It has aired in Indonesia on Global TV and antv, despite having aired on Cartoon Network Asia and Disney Channel Asia in that country. It appeared in Iran on Tehran TV, before that network eventually became IRIB TV5.
In Israel, Oggy and the Cockroaches aired on Arutz HaYeladim. It also aired in Japan on Cartoon Network Japan. LNT aired the series in Latvia. Also, LNK and sister channel TV1 aired it in Lithuania. It has aired in Malaysia on numerous television stations & channels, including TV3 and formerly NTV7, despite having aired in that country on Cartoon Network Asia and Disney Channel Asia.
In the United States, Oggy and the Cockroaches initially aired on Fox as part of the network's Fox Kids programming block from 1998 right up until 1999. and even aired on CBS. It did not return to television in the United States until February 2015 when it launched on Nickelodeon for the first time in 16 years. The show aired using certain episodes of Season 4 until its last episode (High-Rise Nightmare) was aired on March 20, 2015. Reruns of the show aired on Nicktoons until the show was removed completely on May 2015.
Oggy and the Cockroaches started streaming through Rovio's toons.tv service on December 2013 and continued to stream on the service until November 13, 2015, when it was removed along with other Xilam related shows such as Hubert and Takako and Zig and Sharko, possibly due to the attacks on Paris.
On March 14, 2015, TMZ reported that a young viewer pointed out a brief image of a woman's breasts, shown in the episode "(Un)happy Camper!", which was broadcast on Nickelodeon in the United States on the same day, with some parents complaining about the incident to the network.
List of French animated television series
List of French television series
