The phénakisticope was the first widespread animation device that created a fluent illusion of motion. The phénakisticope is regarded as one of the first forms of moving media entertainment that paved the way for the future motion picture and film industry.
The first part of the term 'phénakisticope' comes from the root Greek word φενακίζειν - phenakizein, meaning "to deceive" or "to cheat", as it deceives the eye by making the objects in the pictures appear to move. The second part is possibly a corruption of the word 'scope' from Greek 'skopos', meaning "aim", "target", "object of attention" or "watcher", "one who watches".
The term phénakisticope was probably first used by the French company Alphonse Giroux et Cie in their application for an import license and the title was used on their box sets..
Inventor Joseph Plateau did not give a name for the device when he first published about it in 1833, but used 'phénakisticope' later in the year in another article. His authorized discs were published by the London based company Ackermann as 'Phantasmascope' but this name was soon replaced with 'Fantascope' on following editions.
The spelling 'phenakistiscope' was possibly introduced by lithographers Forrester & Nichol in collaboration with optician John Dunn; they used the title "The Phenakistiscope, or, Magic Disc" for their box sets, as advertised in September 1833.
Currently the misspelling 'phenakistoscope' seems to be most commonly used.
The phénakisticope used a spinning cardboard disc attached vertically to a handle. Arrayed around the disc's center was a series of pictures showing phases of the animation, and cut through it was a series of equally spaced radial slits. The user would spin the disc and look through the moving slits at the disc's reflection in a mirror. The scanning of the slits across the reflected images kept them from simply blurring together, so that the user would see a rapid succession of images that appeared to be a single moving picture. Many versions of the phénakisticope used smaller illustrated uncut cardboard discs to be placed on a larger slotted disc.
The pictures became distorted when spun fast enough to produce the illusion of movement; they appeared a bit slimmer and were slightly curved. Sometimes animators drew an opposite distortion in their pictures to compensate this. However, most animations were not intended to give a realistic representation and the distortion wasn't very obvious in cartoonish pictures.
Unlike the zoetrope and other successors, the phénakisticope could only practically be used by one person at a time.
A variant of the phénakisticope had two discs attached on either side of an axis, one disc had slits and the other pictures; this was slightly more unwieldy but needed no mirror and was claimed to produce clearer images.
Several phénakisticope projectors with glass discs were produced and marketed, but they never became mainstream.
Experiments with stereoscopic versions of the phénakisticope were executed, but none seemed very successful.
The phenakisticope was invented almost simultaneously by the Belgian physicist Joseph Plateau and the Austrian professor of practical geometry Simon Stampfer in December 1832.
In some early experiments Plateau noticed that when looking from a small distance at two concentric cogwheels which turned fast in opposite directions, it produced the optical illusion of seeing a motionless wheel. When the wheels were not concentric the image appeared to have curved lines. He later read Peter Mark Roget's 1824 article Explanation of an optical deception in the appearance of the spokes of a wheel when seen through vertical apertures which addressed the same illusion. Plateau decided to investigate and later published his findings in Correspondance Mathématique et Physique in 1828 and 1830. Early in 1831, Michael Faraday publishes his article "On a peculiar Class of Optical Illusions" about very similar findings, but with some details which inspire Plateau to do more experiments. After several attempts and many difficulties he constructed a working model of the phénakisticope in December 1832. Plateau published his invention in a January 21, 1833 letter to Correspondance Mathématique et Physique. The article was titled Sur un nouveau genre d'illusions d'optique (On a new type of optical illusion) and did not mention a name for the device. It was illustrated with a plate of a pirouetting dancer printed as a black outline, with Plateau suggesting it would be more effective when shaded and colored.
Stampfer read about Faraday's findings in December 1832 and was inspired to do similar experiments, that soon lead to his invention of what he called Stroboscopischen Scheiben oder optischen Zauberscheiben (stroboscope discs or optical magic discs). By February 1833 he had prepared six double-sided discs, which were soon published by Trentsensky & Vieweg. Matthias Trentsensky and Stampfer were granted an Austrian patent (k.k. Privilegium) for the discs on May 7, 1833.
Publisher and Plateau's doctoral advisor Adolphe Quetelet claimed to have received a working model to present to Faraday as early as November 1832. Plateau mentioned in 1836 that he thought it difficult to state the exact time when he got the idea, but he believed he was first able to successfully assemble his invention in December. He stated to trust the assertion of Stampfer to have invented his version at the same time.
Peter Mark Roget claimed in 1834 to have constructed several phénakisticopes and showed them to many friends as early as in the spring of 1831, but as a consequence of more serious occupations he did not get around to publishing any account of his invention.
The German Hofmechanikus Hohnbaum was reported in July 1833 to have invented an improved version which had a disc with pictures on one end and a slotted disc on the other side of an axis.
Publishers Trentsensky & Vieweg were not prepared for the immediate success of their first edition of Professor Stampfer's six double-sided stroboscope discs; it sold out within four weeks and left them unable to ship orders.</ref> These discs probably had round holes as suggested by a 1922 reconstruction by William Day, but no original copies seem to have been located. Trentsensky & Vieweg published an improved and expanded set of eight double-sided discs in July 1833. English editions were published not much later with James Black and Joseph Myers & Co. A total of 28 different disc designs have been credited to Professor Stampfer.
Alph. Giroux & Cie applied for a french import license on May 28, 1833 and were granted one on August 5, 1833. Over the years they released several sets, usually in boxes of 12 discs titled Le Phénakisticope. They were possibly the first to market phénakisticopes after Trentsensky & Vieweg's first edition. Especially the designs from their first set were often bootlegged or imitated.
Joseph Plateau designed six discs for Ackermann & Co in London, which were first published in July 1833 as Phantasmascope and later as Fantascope. Ackermann & Co soon published two more sets of six discs each, one designed by Thomas Talbot Bury and one by Thomas Mann Baynes.
Joseph Plateau and Simon Stampfer both stated around July 1833 that the designs of the discs they had seen (besides their own) were poorly executed.
The phénakisticope became very popular and soon there were very many other publishers releasing discs with numerous names, including: -Die belebte Wunderscheibe (by J. V. Albert, Frankfurt a/m, June 1833) -Toover-schijf (by A. van Emden, August 1833, Amsterdam) -Mclean's Optical Illusions, or, Magic Panorama (London, 1833) -Fores's Moving Panorama, or Optical Illusions (London, September 1833) -The Phenakistiscope or Magic Disc (by Forrester & Nichol & John Dunn, September 1833) -Motoscope, of wonderschijf (Amsterdam, September 1833) -Soffe's Phantascopic Pantomime, or Magic Illusions (December 1833) -The Phenakisticope, or Living Picture (by W. Soffe), Wallis's Wheel of Wonders (London, December 1834) -The Laughingatus, or Magic Circle (by G.S. Tregear, 1835?) -Optische Zauber-Scheiben / Disques Magique (unknown origin except one set executed by Frederic Voigtlaender) -Optische Belustigungen - Optical Amusements - Optic Amusements (unknown origin) -Das Phorolyt oder die magische Doppelscheibe (by Purkyně & Pornatzki, Breslau, 1841) -Fantasmascope. Tooneelen in den spiegel (K. Fuhri, The Hague, 1848) -Kinesiskop (designed by Purkyně, published by Ferdinand Durst, Prague, 1861) -The Magic Wheel (by J. Bradburn, U.S.A., 1864) -L'Ékonoscope (Pellerin & Cie, France, 1868).
After its commercial introduction by Milton Bradley the Zoetrope (patented in 1867) soon became the more popular animation device and consequently fewer phénakisticopes were produced.
The phenakisticope was invented through scientific research into optical illusions and published as such, but soon the device was marketed very successfully as an entertaining novelty toy. After the novelty wore off it became mostly regarded as a toy for children, but it still proved to be a useful demonstration tool for some scientists.
The Czech physiologist Jan Purkyně used his version, called Phorolyt, in lectures since 1837. In 1861 one of the subjects he illustrated was the beating of a heart.
J. Müller publishes a set of 8 discs depicting several oscillations or waves with J.V. Albert in Frankfurt in 1846.
The famous English pioneer of photographic motion studies Eadweard Muybridge built a phenakisticope projector for which he had his photographs rendered as contours on glass discs. The results were not always very scientific, as he often edited his photographic sequences for aesthetic reasons and for the glass discs sometimes even used multiple photographs into new combinations. An entertaining example is the sequence of a man somersaulting over a bull chased by a dog. For only one disc he chose a photographic representation; the sequence of a running horse skeleton, which was probably to detailed to be painted on glass. This disc probably was the very first time a stop motion technique was succesfully applied. Muybridge first called the apparatus Zoogyroscope, but soon settles on the name Zoöpraxiscope and uses it in countless lectures on animal locomotion between 1880 and 1895.
The Special Honorary Joseph Plateau Award, a replica of Plateau's original phenakistiscope, is presented every year to a special guest of the Flanders International Film Festival whose achievements have earned a special and distinct place in the history of international film making.
