Bring It On Again is a 2004 direct-to-video cheerleading comedy film directed by Damon Santostefano and starring Anne Judson-Yager and Bree Turner.
This film, which is a sequel to Bring It On, has a tenuous link to its predecessor, featuring only a similar plot of competing cheerleading teams that have to try something different in order to win. There are no recurring cast members or canonical references to the previous film. Bring It On Again is also the only straight to video sequel of the four that followed Bring It On that shared the same producers. No one else involved in the original film participated in the creation of this film, nor in any of the following. The film does stylistically refer to its predecessor during the end credits, both of which feature outtakes and clips of the cast having fun dancing and singing.
Whittier (Anne Judson-Yager) arrives at the fictional California State College hoping to join the national champion varsity cheerleading team. She meets up with her friend from cheerleading camp, Monica (Faune Chambers), and they're both impressive at the tryouts. Head cheerleader Tina (Bree Turner) is ready to ask them to join the team, but Greg (Bryce Johnson) goes a step further, telling Tina that Whittier will be the next head cheerleader. This angers Tina's pal Marni (Bethany Joy Lenz) who had the position staked out, but at the urging of Dean Sebastian (Kevin Cooney), Tina goes along with the plan, taking Whittier under her wing. Whittier meets Derek (Richard Lee Jackson), a campus D.J. who immediately takes an interest in her. Tina is very demanding and controlling and warns Whittier that Derek is not the type of boy she should be dating. Monica is bothered by Tina's meddling, but Whittier momentarily lets her cheerleading ambition get the better of her, and betrays Derek. Then, Tina, upset with Monica's sassy attitude, punishes her which leads to an injury and she forces Whittier to choose between her friendship and the squad. Whittier and Monica get fed up and quit Tina's tyranny, but Whittier's school spirit cannot be suppressed. With Monica's help, she gathers up the outcasts from the drama club, the dance club, and other groups that have lost their funding because of the squad and forms a ragtag squad of her own, determined to battle the varsity squad for a spot at the national championship. The two teams end up competing for the spot at nationals, with Whittier's squad ultimately winning. Afterward, Whittier offers Tina a spot on her squad, a position that Tina initially refuses but ends up wanting. The film ends with Tina sucking up to Whittier and Monica, deciding she wants to be on their squad after all, while Marni comically throws a fit.
Anne Judson-Yager as Whittier Smith
Bree Turner as Tina Hammersmith
Kevin Cooney as Dean Sebastian
Faune A. Chambers as Monica
Bryce Johnson as Greg
Richard Lee Jackson as Derek
Bethany Joy Lenz as Marni Potts
Holly Towne as Janice
Dennis Hemphill Jr. as Francis
Felicia Day as Penelope Hope
Katherine Bailess as Colleen Lipman
Joshua Gomez as Sammy Stinger
Kelly Stables as Tiny Blonde
Brian Wade as Fatneck
Darren Geare as Croquet Teammate
