Enter the Dragon is a 1973 Hong Kong-American martial arts film directed by Robert Clouse, starring Bruce Lee, John Saxon and Jim Kelly. The film was produced by Fred Weitraub and Paul Heller, at the companies Warner Brothers Inc., Concord Productions, and Sequoia Pictures. This was Bruce Lee's final film appearance (footage was shot and used in what became Game of Death) before his death on 20 July 1973 at age 32. The film was first released on 26 July 1973 in Hong Kong, six days after Lee's death. Lee was also one of the film's writers, along with Michael Allin.
Often considered one of the greatest martial arts films of all time, in 2004, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". The film was often thought of as the one that sparked the "Kung Fu Kraze" both in the United States as well as beyond.
Lee is a Shaolin martial artist from Hong Kong who possesses great philosophical insight into martial arts as well as physical prowess. Lee receives an invitation from a mysterious man, Mr. Han, to compete in a martial arts competition on his island. Lee later finds out that Mr. Han is involved with prostitution and drug trafficking on the island. Approached by the British Intelligence Agency, Lee agrees to go undercover and enter the competition to stop Mr. Han. With the help of his friends, Lee conducts his investigation on the island by searching for evidence and clues, which inevitably stirs up trouble with Han. In a final battle, Lee uses the lesson he learned earlier in the film to defeat and kill Han just as the military arrives to end the mayhem.
Enter the Dragon was the first Chinese martial arts film to have been produced by a major Hollywood studio, Warner Bros., in association with a Hong Kong studio, Lee's Concord Production Inc. The film is largely set in Hong Kong.
Among the stuntmen for the film were members of the Seven Little Fortunes, including Jackie Chan, Sammo Hung and Yuen Biao. This was arguably instrumental in the trio's further association with Golden Harvest studios, which later launched their careers. The portly Hung is shown fighting Lee in the opening sequence of the movie and Chan shows up as a henchman when Lee is discovered inside Han's underground lair.
The soundtrack to the film was composed by Lalo Schifrin, who was also the composer for Mission: Impossible. He composed the score by sampling sounds from China, Korea, and Japan. The sound track was a huge success as well, selling over 500,000 copies. It earned a gold record.
The finished version of the film was not significantly different from the original screenplay. Bruce Lee did not revise the script. Bruce Lee directed the film's opening Shaolin Monastery fight sequence. Lee wanted to use the film as a vehicle for expressing what he saw as the beauty of his Chinese culture, rather than it being just another action film. The original script contained most of the dialogue in the movie.[3] Bolo Yeung went on to make several martial arts films, most notably the Jean-Claude Van Damme films Bloodsport (1987) and Double Impact (1991). Additionally, Lee was very involved in the moviemaking process, taking an on a very creative roll. He also negotiated his own contract.
Enter the Dragon was no easy film to make. It took eight days straight to film some of the fight scenes, causing Saxon to get pretty sick of filming. Additionally, The feast scene itself took three days to film, and it used the same food every day. One time while filming a fight scene, Lee’s hand was cut on a bottle and required 12 stitches.
Lee showed exceptional talent and ability in this movie. He did all of his own stunts, as well as choreographed every fight scene in Enter the Dragon. Additionally, in the sce ne where Lee grabs a cobra, he is in fact grabbing a real cobra—and did so 10 times. Also, none of Lee’s fight scene required special effect as it was all performed live by him. Lee’s moves were so fast that the directors had to speed up the camera during filming and then slow it down during screenings in order to catch and replay his movements.
Enter the Dragon is the film that was considered to make Bruce Lee an international star, and inspire countless more martial art films such as Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.
Many feel that there are some connections between Enter the Dragon and The Black Power Movement. The Black Power movement, by and large lead by Stokley Carmichael, was a racial empowerment movement. Carmichael believed in strengthening the black individual, as well as the black community, without the help of whites. Only then, could true and successful integration take place. Carmichael did not believe in peaceful resistance, and advocated for violence, stating that the Black community and the movement would achieve its goals by "whatever means necessary". Carmichael wanted to bring the country to its knees if it messed with a black man, and he claimed the movement would back up this sentiment.
Themes that are present in within the Black Power Movement are also often present in martial arts movies, such as Enter the Dragon. These themes include use of violence, self-reliance, self-protection, "beating the man", and success of the underdog. This can be thought of as the reason why martial arts films have such a large black audience. These minorities in the black community can take pleasure in seeing the enemy destroyed, and the under dog rising up. This is a sentiment often reiterated within the black community.
The end of World War II set decolonization into motion around the world. Many territories formed new states and claimed independence from European rule, attempting to put an end to colonialism. During colonialism, countries in Africa and Asia, as well as across the globe, were exploited for their labor and raw materials. The inhabitants of these lands were treated brutally and divided up by the European power. After retaliation, Europe lost most of its territories or let them slip away, and the newly independent nations came to fruition in the 1950s and 60’s.
Many historians and film critics have explored the connection between martial arts films and decolonization. Many believe that Decolonization was a major theme in many martial arts movies, as the "kung fu kraze" starting booming only a few decades after independence had been won. Some say it was the foundation of the films. Some say that is was actually Bruce Lee who "opened up an allegorical link with the mass movement toward decolonization". The theory is that when analyzing a martial arts film in the context of decolonization, the fight scenes represent the conflict between imperialism and the popular resistance. The antagonist, Han in Enter the Dragon, is the imperialist, while the hero, Bruce Lee in Enter the Dragon, is the revolutionary. Most of these Kung Fu films end with the defeat of villain against all odds, which represents liberation. So, these films are meant to offer their audience a powerful narrative of liberation.
Enter the Dragon was arguable the first film that combined martial arts films with the Blaxploitation genre. Jim Kelley is thought to be the first Blaxploitation character that appeared in a martial arts movie. He would then go on to be one of the Blaxploitation genres biggest stars. The success of Enter the Dragon, and the large black audience it attracted, caused other films to start incorporating these Blaxploitation characters more and more. Thus, the mingling of the genres was created. Both the Japanese and Black communities were related by their colonialist struggles, thus uniting them on screen.
The film was heavily advertised in America before its release. The budget for advertising was over one million dollars. It was unlike any promotional campaign that had been seen before, and was extremely comprehensive. In order to advertise the film, the studio offered free karate classes, produced thousands of illustrated flip books, comic books, posters, photographs, and organized dozens of news releases, interviews, and public appearances for the stars. Esquire, The Wall Street Journal, Time, and Newsweek all wrote stories on the film.
The soundtrack to the film was composed by Lalo Schifrin, who was also the composer for Mission: Impossible. He composed the score by sampling sounds from China, Korea, and Japan. The sound track was a huge success as well, selling over 500,000 copies. It earned a gold record.
The scene in which Lee states that his style was the style of "Fighting Without Fighting" and then lures Parsons into boarding a dinghy is based upon a famous anecdote involving the 16th century samurai Tsukahara Bokuden.
Jackie Chan appears as a guard during the underground lair battle scene and gets his neck snapped by Lee. He also performed several stunts for the film, including the scene where Lee's character quickly climbs a rooftop at night. However Yuen Wah was Lee's main stunt double for the film, most notably for the more acrobatic feats in the film, such as flipping over the abbot's arms at the beginning and the scene where Lee does a back-flip when O'Hara catches his leg during their fight.
The title of the film was originally intended to be Blood and Steel.
Enter The Dragon was filmed without sound. All of the dialogue and effects were dubbed in during post-production.
Argentinian musician Lalo Schifrin composed the film's musical score. While Schifrin was widely known at the time for his jazz scores, he also incorporated funk and traditional film score elements into the film's soundtrack.
In 1973, Enter the Dragon grossed an estimated $21,483,063 in North America, on a tight budget of $850,000. It was one of the most successful films of 1973.
In India, the movie opened to full houses. In Hong Kong, the film grossed HK$3,307,536—huge business for the time, but substantially less than Lee's Fist of Fury and Way of the Dragon.
The film was well received by critics and is regarded by many as one of the best films of 1973. Critics have referred to Enter the Dragon as "a low-rent James Bond thriller", a "remake of Doctor No" with elements of Fu Manchu. J.C. Maçek III of PopMatters wrote, "Of course the real showcase here is the obvious star here, Bruce Lee, whose performance as an actor and a fighter are the most enhanced by the perfect sound and video transfer. While Kelly was a famous martial artist and a surprisingly good actor and Saxon was a famous actor and a surprisingly good martial artist, Lee proves to be a master of both fields."
Many additional acclaimed newspapers and magazines reviewed the film as well. Variety complimented multiple aspects of the film, claiming that film was overall "rich in the atmosphere", the music score was "a strong asset" and the photography as interesting. Additionally, The New York Times gave the film a rave review. The review stated "The picture is expertly made and well-meshed; it moves like lightning and brims with color. It is also the most savagely murderous and numbing hand-hacker (not a gun in it) you will ever see anywhere."
The film currently holds a 95% approval rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes, with 43 reviews counted and an average rating of 7.8/10. In 2004, the film was deemed "culturally significant" by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry.
The film also ranks No. 474 on Empire magazine's 2008 list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time.
The film has been parodied and referenced in places such as the 1976 film The Pink Panther Strikes Again, the satirical publication The Onion, the Japanese game-show Takeshi's Castle, and the 1977 John Landis comedy anthology film Kentucky Fried Movie (in its lengthy "A Fistful of Yen" sequence, basically a comedic, note for note remake of Dragon) and also in the film Balls of Fury. It was also parodied on television in That '70s Show during the episode "Jackie Moves On" with regular character Fez taking on the Bruce Lee role. Several clips from the film are comically used during the theatre scene in The Last Dragon.
In August 2007, the now defunct Warner Independent Pictures announced that television producer Kurt Sutter would be remaking the film as a noir-style thriller entitled Awaken the Dragon with Korean singer-actor Rain starring. It was announced in September 2014 that Spike Lee will work on the reamke.In March 2015, Brett Ratner revealed that he wanted to make the remake.
The film was considered for two of the American Film Institute's 100 series lists. Lee's character was considered a possible candidate for AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains list. The film itself was also a candidate for AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills, a list of America's most heart-pounding movies.
The popular video game Mortal Kombat borrows multiple plot elements from Enter The Dragon.
The popular 1980s martial arts video game Double Dragon features two enemies named Roper and Williams, a reference to the two characters Roper and Williams from Enter The Dragon.
American Film Institute recognition
AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills – Nominated
AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains:
Lee – Nominated Hero
Universe (Hong Kong)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:35:1) letterboxed
Sound: Cantonese (Dolby Digital 5.1), Mandarin (Dolby Digital 5.1)
Subtitles: Traditional, Simplified Chinese, English, Japanese, Korean, Indonesian, Malaysian, Thai, Vietnamese
Supplements: Trailer, trailers for Way of the Dragon, The Big Boss, Game of Death, Legacy of Rage, star files
All regions, NTSC
Fortune Star – Bruce Lee Ultimate DVD Collection (Hong Kong)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:35:1) anamorphic
Sound: Cantonese (DTS 5.1), Cantonese (Dolby Digital 5.1), Cantonese (Dolby Digital 2.0 Mono), Mandarin (DTS 5.1), Mandarin (Dolby Digital 5.1)
Subtitles: Traditional, Simplified Chinese, English
Supplements: Original trailer, new trailer, still photos, slideshow of photos, celebrity interviews, unseen footage, Game of Death outtakes, Enter the Dragon alternate opening, 32-page booklet
Region 3, NTSC
Zoke Culture (China)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:40:1) anamorphic
Sound: English (DTS 5.1), English (Dolby Digital 5.1), Cantonese (Dolby Digital 2.0 Stereo), Mandarin (Dolby Digital 2.0 Stereo)
Subtitles: Traditional, Simplified Chinese, English, Japanese, Korean, Spanish, Portuguese, Indonesian, French
Supplements: Audio commentary by producer Paul M. Heller and screenwriter Michael Allin, "Blood and Steel: Making of Enter the Dragon", "Bruce Lee: In His Own Words", Linda Lee Cadwell interview gallery, "original" 1973 making-of featurette, "Backyard Workout with Bruce Lee"
All regions, NTSC
Warner – 30th Anniversary Special Edition (America)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:35:1) anamorphic
Sound: English (Dolby Digital 5.1), English (Dolby Digital 2.0 Mono)
Subtitles: English, Spanish, French
Supplements: Disc 1: Audio commentary by producer Paul M. Heller and screenwriter Michael Allin, "Blood and Steel: Making of Enter the Dragon", "Bruce Lee: In His Own Words", Linda Lee Cadwell interview gallery, "Location: Hong Kong with Enter the Dragon" original 1973 documentary, "Backyard Workout With Bruce Lee" Disc 2: "Curse of the Dragon" feature-length documentary, "Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey" feature-length documentary, theatrical trailers, TV spots
Region 1, NTSC
Warner – 25th Anniversary Special Edition (America)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:35:1) anamorphic
Sound: English (Dolby Digital 5.1)
Subtitles: English, Spanish, French
Supplements: Audio commentary by producer Paul M. Heller and screenwriter Michael Allin, Isolated music score, an all-new introduction and interview with Linda Lee Cadwell, "Location: Hong Kong with Enter the Dragon" original 1973 documentary, "Backyard Workout with Bruce", "Bruce Lee In His Own Words", theatrical trailers, TV spots, cast and crew biographies, "Significance of Belts in Martial Arts" notes, "Heir to the Throne" – Jackie Chan notes, retrospective of Hong Kong martial arts films notes and stills, behind-the-scenes notes, reel recommendations – 16 movies
Region 1, NTSC
Warner – Limited Edition (United Kingdom)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:35:1) anamorphic
Sound: English (Dolby Digital 5.1)
Subtitles: English
Supplements: Audio commentary by producer Paul M. Heller and screenwriter Michael Allin, isolated music score, an all-new introduction and interview with Linda Lee Cadwell, "Location: Hong Kong with Enter the Dragon" original 1973 documentary, "Backyard Workout with Bruce", "Bruce Lee: In His Own Words", theatrical trailers, TV spots, cast and crew biographies, 10 exclusive Enter the Dragon postcards, 8 reproductions of original lobby cards, reproduction of the original press brochure
Region 2, PAL
Kam & Ronson (Hong Kong)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:35:1)
Sound: Cantonese (DTS-HD Master Audio 7.1), Cantonese (Dolby True HD 7.1), Mandarin (Dolby Digital EX 6.1), Thai (Dolby Digital EX 6.1)
Subtitles: Traditional Chinese, English, Thai
Supplements: "Alternate opening credits", trailer, photo gallery
Region A
Warner (North America and South America)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:40:1)
Sound: English (Dolby Digital 5.1), Spanish (Dolby Digital 2.0 Surround), French (Dolby Digital 1.0 Mono), Portuguese (Dolby Digital 1.0 Mono)
Subtitles: English, Spanish, French, Portuguese
Supplements: Audio commentary by producer Paul M. Heller and screenwriter Michael Allin, "Blood and Steel: Making of Enter the Dragon", "Bruce Lee: In His Own Words", Linda Lee Cadwell interview gallery, "Location: Hong Kong with Enter the Dragon" original 1973 documentary, "Backyard Workout with Bruce Lee", "Curse of the Dragon" feature-length documentary, "Bruce Lee: A Warrior's Journey" feature-length documentary, theatrical trailers, TV spots
All regions
Warner (40th Anniversary Edition – Remastered)
Aspect ratio: Widescreen (2:40:1)
Sound: English (DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1), French (Dolby Digital Mono), German (Dolby Digital Mono), Italian (Dolby Digital Mono), Japanese (Dolby Digital Mono), Japanese (Dolby Digital 2.0), Spanish (Dolby Digital Mono), Spanish (Dolby Digital 2.0), Polish (Dolby Digital 2.0), Russian (Dolby Digital 5.1)
Subtitles: English, Spanish, French, Portuguese, Japanese, German, Italian, Greek, Korean, Polish, Romanian, Russian, Serbian, Turkish
Supplements: Audio commentary by producer Paul M. Heller and screenwriter Michael Allin, "No Way As Way", "Wing Chun", "Return to Han's Island", "Blood and Steel: Making of Enter the Dragon", "Bruce Lee: In His Own Words", Linda Lee Cadwell interview gallery, "Location: Hong Kong with Enter the Dragon" original 1973 documentary, "Backyard Workout with Bruce Lee", "Curse of the Dragon" feature-length documentary, theatrical trailers, TV spots
All regions
