Mario Casas Sierra (born in A Coruña, Galicia, Spain on 12 June 1986) is a Spanish actor. He is probably best known for his performances in television series Paco's Men (Spanish: Los hombres de Paco) and The Boat (El barco), as well as in films Summer Rain (El camino de los ingleses), Three Steps Above Heaven (Tres metros sobre el cielo), I Want You (Tengo ganas de ti), and Palm Trees in the Snow (Palmeras en la Nieve).
Mario Casas began his acting career with episode appearances in television series Obsesión (English: Obsession), Motivos personales (Personal Motives) and Mujeres (Women). He came to domestic media attention with his film debut in the 2006 film El camino de los ingleses (Summer Rain), directed by Antonio Banderas who gave him the opportunity to participate.
That same year he joined the cast of LaSexta series SMS. Casas then reached international audience as Aitor Carrasco in the Antena 3 series Los hombres de Paco (Paco's Men), which he starred from 2007 to 2010. Later in 2009 Casas appeared in two hit films, Fuga de cerebros (Brain Drain) opposite Amaia Salamanca, and Mentiras y gordas (Sex, Lies and Parties) with he's bestfriend Yon González. Both managed to lead the box office over the weekend of its release.
In 2009, Casas appeared in two hit films, Fuga de cerebros (Brain Drain) opposite Amaia Salamanca, and Mentiras y gordas (Sex, Lies and Parties) with Yon González, Ana Maria Polvorosa, Ana de Armas and Hugo Silva. In 2010, Casas starred Tres metros sobre el cielo (Three Steps Above Heaven) opposite María Valverde. It was eventually the highest-grossing Spanish film of the year. A sequel Tengo ganas de ti (I Want You) , which starts Casas, Valverde and Clara Lago, premiered in 2012."Mario Casas, María Valverde y Clara Lago presentan 'Tengo ganas de ti'". Hola (in Spanish). 19 June 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2012.  In 2010 Casas starred Carne de neon (Neon Meat) directed by Paco Cabezas later that year on 3 December 2010, Tres metros sobre el cielo (Three Steps Above Heaven) opposite María Valverde. It was eventually the highest-grossing Spanish film of the year.
Since 2011, Casas has starred the Antena 3 series El barco (The Boat) as Ulises Garmendia, opposite Blanca Suárez. He was ranked the second at the 20 minutos list of sexiest Spanish actors.
Grupo 7 (Unit 7) by Alberto Rodriguez and the most anticipated sequel of the year Tengo ganas de ti (I Want You), which starts Casas, Valverde and Clara Lago, premiered in 2012."Mario Casas, María Valverde y Clara Lago presentan 'Tengo ganas de ti'". Hola (in Spanish). 19 June 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2012. 
Casas is set to star three films in 2013 – First, he made his first film in English titled Eden (Eden) with American actors Jessica Lowndes, James Remar, Sung Kang, Diego Boneta directed by Shyam Madiraju in Malaysia in which I play felix the goalie. Later that year Ismael (Ismael) by Marcelo Piñeyro and Álex de la Iglesia's Las brujas de Zugarramurdi (The Witches of Zugarramurdi) opposite Hugo Silva,"Mario Casas y Hugo Silva, dos atractivos 'hechizados' en la nueva cinta de Álex de la Iglesia". Hola (in Spanish). 28 September 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2012. .
During the late 2013 and early 2014 has shor between Colombia and Chile, his second film project in English called Los 33 (The 33) with Antonio Banderas and Juliette Binoche, a story based on the Chilean mining accident that occurred in 2010. In 2015 Mario starred in the new Álex de la Iglesia comedy film My Great Night and also in the romantic drama film Palmeras en la Nieve (Palm Trees in the Snow), where he repeated with the director of the films Tres metros sobre el cielo (Three Steps Above Heaven) and Tengo ganas de ti (I Want You), Fernando Gonzalez Molina.
Casas has four younger siblings – Sheila (born on 21 November 1987), Christian (born 1992), Óscar (born on 21 September 1998) and Daniel (born on 27 April 2014). Christian and Óscar are also actors, while Sheilla is a law student. Born in A Coruña, Galicia, Casas and his family moved to Barcelona in 1994. Having initially wanted to become a policeman, firefighter or a football player, he eventually decided to become an actor after he had enrolled the Cristina Rota School of Dramatic Arts and relocated to Madrid, aged seventeen. He is a supporter of Deportivo de La Coruña and FC Barcelona.
