Scarecrow is a 1973 road movie starring Gene Hackman and Al Pacino.
 The story revolves around the odd relationship between two vagabonds: Max Millan (Gene Hackman), a short-tempered ex-convict, and Francis Lionel "Lion" Delbuchi (Al Pacino), a childlike ex-sailor. They meet on the road in California and agree to become partners in a business, once they reach Pittsburgh.
Lion is on his way to Detroit to see the child he has never met and make amends with his wife Annie, to whom he has been sending all the money he made while at sea. Max agrees to make a detour on his way to Pittsburgh, where the bank that Max has been sending all his seed money is located. His plans are to open a car wash, with Lion as a partner.
While visiting Max's sister in Denver, the pair's antics land them in a prison farm for a month. Max blames Lion for being sent back to jail and shuns him. Lion is befriended, then assaulted by an inmate named Riley (Richard Lynch). Max proceeds to teach Riley a lesson, rekindling his friendship with Lion.
The two have a profound effect on each other, with Lion becoming more of an adult and Max loosening up his high-strung aggression (at one point doing a tongue-in-cheek striptease to defuse a fight at a bar). When they do finally make it to Detroit, Max has to take care of Lion, who becomes catatonic after hearing of the passing of his unborn child (a lie made up by Annie to make Lion feel guilty for leaving them).
Gene Hackman as Max Millan
Al Pacino as Francis Lionel "Lion" Delbuchi
Eileen Brennan as Darlene
Dorothy Tristan as Coley
Ann Wedgeworth as Frenchy
Richard Lynch as Riley
Penelope Allen as Annie Gleason
Richard Hackman as Mickey Grenwood
Al Cingolani as Skipper
Rutanya Alda as Woman in camp
Penelope Allen plays the mother of Pacino's son in Scarecrow. She would next appear as the head teller of the bank that Pacino robs in Dog Day Afternoon.
Gene Hackman's brother Richard appears as Mickey in the film.
 The film shared the Grand Prix at the 1973 Cannes Film Festival with The Hireling directed by Alan Bridges.
In a review of the film from the time of its 2013 re-release, Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian described the film as "a freewheeling masterpiece", describing Hackman and Pacino as giving "the performances of their lives".
Peter Biskind, on the other hand, described the film as being of "secondary" significance in his book Easy Riders, Raging Bulls.
List of American films of 1973
