Kindergarten Cop is a 1990 American comedy film directed by Ivan Reitman, distributed by Universal Pictures. Arnold Schwarzenegger stars as John Kimble, a tough police detective who must go undercover as a kindergarten teacher to catch drug dealer Cullen Crisp (Richard Tyson) before Crisp can get to his former wife and son.
While undercover, Kimble discovers his passion for teaching and considers changing his profession to become an educator. Pamela Reed plays his partner, Phoebe O'Hara, and Penelope Ann Miller plays Joyce, the teacher who becomes his love interest. The original music score was composed by Randy Edelman.
After years of pursuing drug lord Cullen Crisp (Richard Tyson), Los Angeles Police detective John Kimble (Arnold Schwarzenegger) finally has him on a murder charge after Crisp shot and killed an informant (Tom Kurlander) who gave him information regarding the whereabouts of his former wife, Rachel Myatt Crisp, and son Cullen, Jr.
Kimble, accompanied by detective and former teacher Phoebe O'Hara (Pamela Reed), go undercover in Astoria, Oregon, to find Crisp's former wife who allegedly stole millions of dollars from Crisp before fleeing. The detectives plan to offer her immunity in exchange for testifying against Crisp in court. To find Crisp's former wife, O'Hara is to act as the substitute teacher in Cullen Jr.'s kindergarten class at Astoria Elementary School.
Unfortunately, O'Hara, who is hypoglycemic, gets a terrible case of the stomach flu and falls ill at the last moment, so Kimble takes the teacher's job. The suspicious school principal, Miss Schlowski (Linda Hunt), is convinced Kimble will not last long before quitting. Though he is overwhelmed at first, Kimble adapts to his new status, despite not having any formal teaching experience or training. Using his pet ferret as a class mascot, his police training as a model for structure of the classes, his experience as a father, and positive reinforcement, he becomes a much-admired and cherished figure to the children.
In turn, Kimble begins to like his undercover job and considers changing his career. He also deals with a case of child abuse. Miss Schlowski witnesses his teaching style and assures him that though she does not agree with his methods, she can see that he is a good teacher.
Kimble becomes fond of his student Dominic's mother, Joyce Palmieri (Penelope Ann Miller), who also works at the school. Joyce is estranged from her husband and will not speak of him. After a series of conversations with the gradually more trusting Joyce, Kimble slowly deduces that she has to be Rachel Crisp and that Dominic is Cullen Jr.
Back in California, the witness to informant Kurlander's murder dies after using spiked cocaine provided by Crisp's mother, Eleanor (Carroll Baker). This closes the case because the prosecution has no further evidence. Crisp is freed from prison and immediately heads to Astoria.
Crisp and Eleanor arrive in the town and begin looking for Dominic. Crisp starts a fire in the school library in order to get to his son and holds him hostage after being discovered. Luckily, Kimble's ferret bites Crisp on the neck, allowing Dominic to run free. Crisp shoots Kimble in the leg, then Kimble fatally shoots Crisp. Eleanor discovers her dead son, but is knocked unconscious with a baseball bat by O'Hara before she can shoot Kimble.
Eleanor is arrested while the unconscious Kimble (much to the sadness of the children) is hospitalized. During Kimble's recovery, O'Hara and her chef fiancé (Bob Nelson) announce their marriage, inviting him to attend. After Kimble recovers, he decides to retire from the police force and return to teaching at the school, where he visits and receives a kiss from Joyce in front of all of the kids.
Arnold Schwarzenegger as Detective John Kimble: a tough and divorced Austrian-born LAPD street cop who is forced to take an undercover assignment as a kindergarten teacher, leading him to consider changing his profession once he discovers his passion for teaching. In contrast with his partner, Kimble hates his career as a police officer.
Penelope Ann Miller as Joyce Palmieri/Rachel Myatt Crisp: a teacher whom Kimble falls for, but who is also Crisp's former wife. She has a young son, Dominic, who is in Kimble's kindergarten class.
Pamela Reed as Detective Phoebe O'Hara: Kimble's partner and a former school teacher who gets food poisoning, forcing Kimble to cover for her on the assignment. She briefly poses as his sister, Ursula Kimble. O'Hara and Kimble resent being paired with each other initially, but ultimately become good friends. In contrast with Kimble, O'Hara hates teaching, which is why she changed her profession and became a policewoman.
Linda Hunt as Miss Schlowski: the school principal. Though initially suspicious of Kimble, she eventually grows to respect him after seeing his compassion towards the children and the excellent results of his teaching.
Richard Tyson as Cullen Crisp, Sr.: a drug kingpin who is obsessed with tracking down his former wife and son.
Carroll Baker as Eleanor Crisp: Crisp's overbearing mother and accomplice.
Christian and Joseph Cousins as Dominic Palmieri/Cullen Crisp, Jr.: Joyce and Crisp's son who grows close to Kimble.
Andrew Dimarco as Zach Sullivan: a shy student in the class and the first boy Kimble suspects is Cullen Jr. Kimble learns later that Zach's parents are still married and dealing with domestic violence. As both a police officer and teacher, Kimble confronts Zach's parents and presses charges against his father for child abuse.
Jayne Brook as Zach's mother.
Cathy Moriarty as Jillian: a divorced mother whose husband left her and their young son, Sylvester, for his male romantic partner; she fears that her son may share his father's homosexuality.
Ben Diskin as Sylvester: Jillian's son who likes looking under girls' skirts using their dolls, which she approves because of his father's sexuality.
Miko Hughes as Joseph: who enjoys telling people of the anatomical differences between boys and girls, which he apparently learned from his father who is a gynecologist.
Sarah Rose Karr as Emma: one of Kimble's students.
Richard Portnow as Captain Salazar: Kimble and O'Hara's boss.
Tom Kurlander as Danny: a drug runner and Crisp's informant, as well as Crisp's murder victim.
Alix Koromzay as Cindy: Danny's drug addict girlfriend and the only witness to his murder, which helps lead to her demise.
Bob Nelson as Henry Shoop: O'Hara's fiancé who also befriends Kimble.
Tom Dugan as Crisp's lawyer.
Emily Eby as Julie.
Odette Yustman as Rosa.
Angela Bassett as Flight Attendant.
Brian Bruney was an extra in the film. He was 8 years old during filming.
Bill Murray, Patrick Swayze, and Danny DeVito were all approached to play the role of John Kimble.
In addition to the Cousins twins, a second set of identical twins was cast to play part of Kimble's class. Tiffany and Krystle Mataras, who later went on to star as the daughters of one of the antagonists in Problem Child 2, actually played a set of identical twins named Tina and Rina, as opposed to the Cousins twins who doubled in the same role.
Exterior scenes at Astoria Elementary School were filmed at John Jacob Astor Elementary School, located at 3550 Franklin Ave. in Astoria, Oregon.
Universal Studios hired local artists Judith Niland and Carl Lyle Jenkins to paint murals on the walls at Astoria, and provided new playground equipment, a fenced playground, and a new lawn and hedges around the school building. Most of the filming was completed after school was out in June 1990 allowing many of the students and staff to be extras in the movie. Students' artwork was also used.
Schwarzenegger's contract stipulated that a private studio for daily workouts and weightlifting be provided for the actor and his personal staff; a suitable studio was located, but when an agreement could not be reached, the actor threatened to pull out of the production. An Astoria business owner stepped in and donated unused commercial space deemed suitable for Schwarzenegger and the shoot continued.
Also filmed in or near Astoria:
John and Phoebe stayed at the Bayview Motel, 783 W. Marine Drive. The vintage lodging facility "played itself" in the film.
Scenes involving John and Phoebe walking to dinner, and Crisp and his mother shopping, were filmed on Commercial Street in downtown Astoria.
The exterior portions of the restaurant scene were filmed outside the Seafare Restaurant at the Red Lion Inn, 400 Industry St.
Scenes at Joyce and Dominic's house were filmed at a private residence located at 414 Exchange St.
Highway scenes were filmed on U.S. 26 east of Seaside, Oregon, 20 miles from Astoria.
The school picnic was filmed at Ecola State Park near Cannon Beach, Oregon, 25 miles south of Astoria.
Information on Astoria-area locations are courtesy of the Astoria & Warrenton Area Chamber of Commerce.
Interior school scenes were shot at Universal Studios in Hollywood. The film's opening scene was filmed at the Westfield MainPlace in Santa Ana, California and South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa, CA.
The film received mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 51%, based on 35 reviews. On Metacritic, it has a score of 61 out of 100, based on 15 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews." Reviewer Caryn James of The New York Times said, "Like Twins, which was also directed by Ivan Reitman, nothing in the film is as funny as the idea of it."
In Kim Newman's review for Empire, he wrote, "with a heart of purest mush, the film still manages to be generally entertaining" and gave it 3 stars out of 5. An EW.coms review at the time of release notes that: "the movie never quite gels and it is not going to generate quite the mega-hit business their producers are counting on," giving the movie a 'C' grade. Roger Ebert said the movie: "is made up of two parts that shouldn't fit, but somehow they do, making a slick entertainment out of the improbable, the impossible and Arnold Schwarzenegger" and awarded the film three stars.
On April Fool's Day 2012, as a prank, it was announced that the film was selected for a release on DVD and Blu-ray Disc as part of the Criterion Collection, a video-distribution company dedicated to the release of "important classic and contemporary films". It was said to be selected as important in part because of its genre-revisionist use of both the policier and family comedy genres in the same film. It was officially released on Blu-ray on July 1, 2014.
Despite the mixed reviews, the film was a box office success and has grossed $91.4 million in North America, $110.5 in other territories, and $202 million worldwide.
In June 2015, Showbiz 411 announced that the studio's 1440 division is developing a sequel to the film with Don Michael Paul as director and David H. Steinberg as scriptwriter. The protagonist will have an Indian sidekick named Sanjit and they will be searching for a flash drive that has been stolen from the United States Federal Witness Protection Program. The antagonists will be Albanian.
Showbiz 411 also caused speculation that a television series may be being considered. Dolph Lundgren was seen shooting scenes for the film. The sequel is called Kindergarten Cop 2.
List of American films of 1990
