Richard W. Farnsworth (born September 1, 1920 Los Angeles - died October 6, 2000 Lincoln, New Mexico) was an American actor and stuntman. He is best known for his performances in The Grey Fox (1982) for which he received a Golden Globe Award nomination and The Straight Story (1999), for which he received a Oscar nomination. His sudden death followed a long struggle with prostate cancer
Farnsworth was born on September 1, 1920 in Los Angeles, California, to a housewife mother and an engineer father. He was raised during the Great Depression. When he was seven, Farnsworth's father died. He then lived with his aunt, mother, and two sisters in downtown Los Angeles.
Farnsworth enjoyed a long marriage and had two children. After becoming a widower, he married again and lived on a ranch in Lincoln, New Mexico.
On October 6, 2000, after a long battle with metastatic prostate cancer, Farnsworth committed suicide by shooting himself at his ranch. He is interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills) in Hollywood Hills, Los Angeles, California in the Columbarium of Purity (N-63294) beside his wife, Margaret nee Hill (1919-1985).
In 1937, age 16, Farnsworth was working as a stable hand at a polo field in Los Angeles for six dollars a week when he was offered employment with better pay as a stuntman. He rode horses in films such as The Adventures of Marco Polo featuring Gary Cooper and performed horse-riding stunts in films including A Day at the Races (1937) and Gunga Din (1939). Farnsworth was employed on the set of Spartacus (1960) for eleven months where he drove a chariot.
From stunt work, Farnsworth gradually moved into acting in Western movies. He made uncredited appearances in numerous films, including Gone with the Wind (1939), Red River (1948), The Wild One (1953), and The Ten Commandments (1956).
Farnsworth received his first acting credit in 1963 and went on to act in western films and also television shows. He had a role in Roots (1977). In 1992, he co-starred with Wilford Brimley in The Boys of Twilight. His breakthrough came when he played stagecoach robber Bill Miner in the 1982 Canadian film The Grey Fox. He appeared as a baseball coach in The Natural (1984). Another prominent role was the suspicious sheriff in the film version of Stephen King's Misery (1990).
Farnsworth became well known in the Pacific Northwest as the groundskeeper who saw the mythical "Artesians" in the 1980s Olympia Beer advertising campaign.
1979, Comes a Horseman
Nomination for Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
National Board of Review Award for Best Supporting Actor
National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting Actor (tied with Robert Morley in Who Is Killing the Great Chefs of Europe?)
Nomination for New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor (second place)
1982, The Grey Fox
Genie Award for Best Performance by a Foreign Actor
London Film Critics Circle Award for Actor of the Year (tied with James Mason in The Shooting Party)
Taormina Film Fest: Golden Mask
Nomination for Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
1985 Chase Nomination for Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film
1985, Gemini Award for Matthew Cuthbert in the Canadian miniseries Anne of Green Gables (1985).
1990, The Straight Story, nomination for Best Actor
Hollywood Walk of Fame star at 1560 Vine Street
1997, induction into the Western Performers Hall of Fame at the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
1999, The Straight Story
Best actor Ft. Lauderdale International Film Festival
Independent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead
New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Actor
Nomination for Academy Award for Best Actor
Nomination for Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor
Nomination for Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Nomination for Las Vegas Film Critics Society Award for Best Actor
Nomination Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor (second place)
Nomination for Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Actor
Nomination for Satellite Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Nomination for Southeastern Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor (second place)
