Jesse Adam Eisenberg (born October 5, 1983) is an American actor, author, playwright, and comedian. He made his television debut with the short-lived comedy-drama series Get Real (1999–2000). Following his first leading role in the comedy-drama film Roger Dodger (2002), he appeared in the drama film The Emperor's Club (2002), the psychological thriller The Village (2004), the comedy-drama The Squid and the Whale (2005) and the drama The Education of Charlie Banks (2007). In 2006, Eisenberg won the Vail Film Festival Rising Star Award for his role in The Living Wake.
In 2009, he starred in the comedy-drama Adventureland with Kristen Stewart and the horror comedy Zombieland with Emma Stone, Abigail Breslin, and Woody Harrelson. He then played Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg in The Social Network (2010), for which he received BAFTA Award, Golden Globe, and Academy Award nominations in the Best Actor category. He also starred in Holy Rollers (2010), which was nominated for the Grand Jury Prize at the 2010 Sundance Film Festival.
Since then, he has gone on to voice the main character, Blu, a male Spix's macaw, in the animated films Rio (2011) and Rio 2 (2014), and starred in the action-comedy 30 Minutes or Less (2011). Eisenberg then starred in Woody Allen's To Rome with Love (2012) and the magician caper film Now You See Me (2013). He then re-teamed with Kristen Stewart for the action-comedy film American Ultra (2015); portrayed Lex Luthor opposite Ben Affleck, Henry Cavill, and Gal Gadot in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, which was released in March 2016; and reprised his role as J. Daniel Atlas in the sequel to Now You See Me, Now You See Me 2 in 2016. Eisenberg reunited with Allen and Stewart in Café Society, which opened the 2016 Cannes Film Festival.
Eisenberg has contributed pieces to The New Yorker and McSweeney's websites. He has written and starred in three plays for the New York stage: Asuncion, The Revisionist, and The Spoils. Eisenberg's first book, Bream Gives Me Hiccups: and Other Stories, a short story collection, was released in September 2015.
Eisenberg was born in Queens, New York, and grew up in East Brunswick Township, New Jersey. His mother, Amy (née Fishman), who now teaches cultural sensitivity in hospitals, previously worked as a clown at children's parties and choreographer for a Catholic high school for 20 years. His father, Barry Eisenberg, drove a taxicab, then owned and worked at a hospital, and later became a college professor, teaching sociology. He has two sisters, Hallie Kate Eisenberg, a former child actress who was once famous as the "Pepsi girl" in a series of commercials, and Kerri Eisenberg, now Kerry Lea, who also worked as an actress and started The Acting Creatively Veg Kids, a children's theatre troupe who "use their passion for compassion to entertain, educate, and change the world" about vegetarianism and animal rights, of which both Jessie Eisenberg and Hallie Eisenberg played in.
Eisenberg was raised in a secular Jewish family that originated in Poland and Ukraine. He attended the East Brunswick Public Schools at Frost School, Hammarskjold Middle School, and Churchill Junior High School, and spent his sophomore year at East Brunswick High School. Eisenberg then transferred to the High School of Performing Arts in New York. When he was a senior, he received his breakthrough role in the independent comedy-drama film Roger Dodger.
Eisenberg struggled to fit in at school due to his anxiety and sensitivity, and began acting in plays at an early age. When he was 7, he starred as Oliver Twist in a children's theater production of the musical Oliver!, and by the age of 12 he was an understudy in the 1996 Broadway revival of Tennessee Williams' Summer and Smoke. At 13, he understudied the role of Young Scrooge in a musical version of A Christmas Carol starring Tony Randall. Eisenberg made his first professional role in Arje Shaw's off-Broadway play, The Gathering, at the age of 16. He stated, "When playing a role, I would feel more comfortable, as you're given a prescribed way of behaving."
Eisenberg started writing screenplays at sixteen, some of which were optioned by major studios, but claimed that he was dissatisfied with the lack of control he had over his creations once they were sold. Pre-fame, Eisenberg got into trouble with Woody Allen's lawyers. As a teenager he penned a play about how Woody Allen came to change his name and managed to get the script to Allen's "people". Instead of a seal of approval, Eisenberg received two "cease and desist" letters. Eisenberg would go on to star in Woody Allen's 2012 film To Rome with Love, as well as the 2016 Café Society, which opened the 2016 Cannes Film Festival.
Eisenberg would go on to study anthropology at The New School in Greenwich Village, New York City. Eisenberg majored in liberal arts, with a concentration in Democracy and Cultural Pluralism. Originally, he had applied and was accepted to New York University directly following his high school graduation, but declined enrolment in order to complete his first film, Roger Dodger.
Eisenberg made his television debut in the series Get Real, from 1999 to 2000. In 2001, he appeared in a UK Dr Pepper commercial as "Butt Naked Boy." After appearing in the made-for-television film Lightning: Fire from the Sky at 18, he starred in the independent film Roger Dodger (for which he won an award at the San Diego film festival for Most Promising New Actor), and in The Emperor's Club, both of which were released in 2002 to generally positive reviews.
In 2005, Eisenberg appeared in Cursed, a horror film directed by Wes Craven, and The Squid and the Whale, a well-reviewed independent drama starring Laura Linney and Jeff Daniels. In 2007, he starred opposite Richard Gere and Terrence Howard in The Hunting Party, a comic thriller in which he plays an American journalist reporting from Bosnia. In 2009, Eisenberg played the lead role Adventureland, a comedy directed by Greg Mottola and filmed in Kennywood Park, near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Filming wrapped in October 2007, and the movie premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in 2009. In November 2007, Eisenberg was cast in the indie comic-drama Holy Rollers alongside his sister, Hallie Eisenberg, who played his fictional sister in the film. He played a young Hasidic Jew who becomes involved in the ecstasy smuggling trade, using his religion as a disguise to deal without suspicion. Filming took place in New York in 2008. During the late 2000s, he also had roles in the independent films Solitary Man, playing college student Daniel, and Camp Hell, a horror film directed by George Van Buskirk.
Eisenberg's breakthrough starring role was as the endearingly neurotic Columbus in Zombieland. The horror-comedy, which saw him with Woody Harrelson, Emma Stone, and Abigail Breslin on a roadtrip through a post-zombie apocalypse America, was a sleeper hit. In 2010, he starred alongside Andrew Garfield and Justin Timberlake in the role of Facebook creator Mark Zuckerberg in the film The Social Network, for which he earned the Best Actor Award from the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures, and nominations for Best Actor at the BAFTA Awards, Golden Globes, and Academy Awards. According to the film's director, David Fincher, both he and screenwriter Aaron Sorkin knew Eisenberg was the one for the role as soon as they watched his audition tape, despite Eisenberg's own anxieties about his audition. On November 22, 2010, Eisenberg was honored, along with Whoopi Goldberg, Joycelyn Engle, and Harvey Krueger, at the Children at Heart Celebrity Dinner Gala and Fantasy Auction, to benefit The Children of Chernobyl. Steven Spielberg is Chair of the event each year. On January 29, 2011, Eisenberg hosted Saturday Night Live on NBC, with musical guest Nicki Minaj. During his opening monologue, Eisenberg was joined by Facebook creator Mark Zuckerberg.
In 2011, he starred in the box-office animated hit Rio, as the main character Blu, a metropolitan, domesticated male Spix's macaw who learns how to fly. He starred alongside Anne Hathaway, his former co-star (and onscreen sibling) from Get Real, as well as George Lopez, Tracy Morgan, will.i.am and Jamie Foxx. He featured in one song, "Real in Rio", in the movie's soundtrack, which was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song. He also starred alongside Aziz Ansari, Danny McBride, and Nick Swardson in 30 Minutes or Less, a film noir heist-comedy about a pizza delivery man, played by Eisenberg, who is forced to rob a bank, which was released in August 2011. In October 2011, Eisenberg made his playwriting debut in Rattlestick Playwrights Theater's Off-Broadway production of Asuncion, staged at Cherry Lane Theatre. Eisenberg also acted in the play, which was directed by Kip Fagan. The play highlights two overeducated, liberal-minded friends, played by Eisenberg and Justin Bartha, whose assumptions are challenged by their new Filipina roommate, played by Camille Mana.
In 2012, he starred alongside Melissa Leo in Why Stop Now, a drama about a drug addict mother (Leo) and her piano prodigy son (Eisenberg), and in the magical realist romantic comedy To Rome with Love, directed by Woody Allen. That same year, he filed a $3 million lawsuit against the producers of the 2010 direct-to-DVD movie Camp Hell, claiming exploitation. According to the lawsuit, Eisenberg agreed to appear in the film as a favor to his friends. He was on set for one day of filming in 2007, earned about $3,000, and logged only a few minutes of total screentime. Because of his minimal involvement in the production, he was surprised to see that his face was prominently featured on the cover of the DVD, implying that he starred in the film. His lawsuit asserts various California law causes of action, including claims for unfair business practices and publicity rights.
In 2013, Eisenberg reunited with Woody Harrelson for the magician caper thriller Now You See Me, playing a world-famous close-up magician and street performer recruited into a secret group of elite magicians to pull off bank heists with magic tricks, redistributing the money from a wealthy businessman (Michael Caine) to victims of his corrupt capitalist schemes. That year he announced his plan to continue writing, for both stage and screen, as well as continuing to act. He starred in Richard Ayoade's drama, The Double (2013), which was shot in 2012, and reprised his role as Blu in Rio 2 (2014). He starred alongside Kristen Stewart in the action comedy American Ultra (2015), playing a rogue sleeper agent being chased by the C.I.A.
In 2015, Eisenberg portrayed Rolling Stone journalist David Lipsky in the biographical drama film The End of the Tour, appearing opposite Jason Segel, who portrayed the late author David Foster Wallace. Eisenberg's third play, The Spoils, premiered off-Broadway in The New Group Perishing Square Signature Center Alice Griffin Box Theatre. The play featuring Eisenberg as Ben, also starring Kunal Nayyar, Michael Zegen, Erin Darke, and Annapurna Sriram, was the winner of The Blanche and Irving Laurie Foundation Theatre Visions Fund Award. On September 8, 2015, Eisenberg's first book, Bream Gives Me Hiccups, a collection of short humor pieces, was released.
Eisenberg serves on the Board of Advisors for Playing On Air, a public radio show/podcast that works with contemporary playwrights to produce plays for "today's digital audience." He has written one short play for Playing On Air, called A Little Part of All of Us (2015), which he starred in with Justin Bartha. He has voiced for two other plays, The Final Interrogation of Ceaucescu’s Dog (2015), written by Warren Leight, and The Blizzard (2016), written by David Ives and directed by John Rando.
Eisenberg played the supervillain Lex Luthor in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice, which was released in March 2016, to mixed reviews. As part of a viral marketing campaign to promote the film, a fictional write-up of the “new” LexCorp in Fortune, stylized as a magazine profile and published October 5, 2015, revealed that Lex Luthor's full name is Alexander Luthor, Jr. In the interview, Luthor is described as “a 31-year-old wunderkind who transformed an aging petrochemical and heavy machinery dinosaur into a tech darling of the Fortune 500 in what some call a superhuman feat.”
Eisenberg then starred in Café Society, directed by Woody Allen. Other cast members include Jeannie Berlin, Blake Lively, Parker Posey, Steve Carell, Corey Stoll, Ken Stott, and Tony Sirico. The film had its world premiere at the Cannes Film Festival on May 11, 2016. Eisenberg next reprised his role as street magician J. Daniel "Danny" Atlas in Now You See Me 2, which was released on June 10, 2016, previewed June 9, to mixed reviews. The film was shot primarily in London and Macau. It has grossed over $267 million worldwide, and Lionsgate CEO Jon Feltheimer announced that they had "already begun early planning for Now You See Me 3.
On June 2, 2016, with previews starting May 27, Eisenberg returned to debut his role as Ben in a London run on West End's Trafalgar Studios, with Scott Elliott returning to direct. Nayyar and Sriram reprised their roles while Michael Zegen and Erin Darke's characters were replaced, respectively, by Alfie Allen and Katie Brayben.
Eisenberg is creating, writing, and directing a comedy adaptation of Bream Gives Me Hiccups with Jax Media, starring Parker Posey, Victor Rasuk, and Elliott Smith. A pilot was filmed in June. A sequel to the 2009 Zombieland is reportedly in development at Sony, with a logo for Zombieland 2 having debuted at 2016 CinemaCon. Writers of the first Zombieland, Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick, are penning the script, with David Callaham on board as writer with Ruben Fleischer as director. In May 2016, Eisenberg stated that he would be reprising his role as Lex Luthor in the upcoming Justice League (2017 film). This was confirmed in a interview with ShortList magizine the following month.
He dated Anna Strout from 2002 to 2012 after they met on the set of The Emperor's Club, where she worked as a crew member and assistant. Eisenberg dated actress Mia Wasikowska from 2013 to 2015 after they worked together in The Double. He has since gotten back together with Strout, and has worked with her at an Indiana domestic violence shelter, where Strout's mother, Toby Strout, serves as executive director. Eisenberg lived with his sister Hallie and her boyfriend, singer-songwriter and contestant on season 10 of NBC's The Voice, Owen Danoff, in New York, until Hallie and Danoff moved to Nashville in June 2016.
Eisenberg has obsessive–compulsive disorder and is open about it. He said of his condition: "I touch the tips of my fingers in a weird way; I don't step on cracks; if I'm going onto a new surface - be it carpet to concrete, or concrete to wood, or wood to concrete, any new surface - I have to make sure all parts of my feet touch the ground equally before I touch that new thing. So I'll often hesitate before walking into a new room." He has also spoken about going to therapy to manage his anxieties - OCD, separation anxiety, social anxiety - and depression, the latter of which he struggled with a lot when he was younger, as well as how acting helped him better cope. He has said that acting serves as a coping mechanism.
Eisenberg is fond of cats and has been involved in fostering animals. He is a vegetarian, and was vegan for a short period of time. He has been associated with Farm Sanctuary and has presented at several of their galas. In September 2015, Eisenberg announced that, starting November, he would match donations made to Middle Way House, a domestic violence shelter in Bloomington, Indiana, up to $100,000 until April 3. All contributions made wentt towards the organization's mortgage payment fund that was matched by a committee, led by Eisenberg. Founded in 1971, Middle Way provides shelter for women and children fleeing violence at home. "It's an incredible collective," Eisenberg told a reporter. "It's the kind of place where the residents go through their wonderful program and end up working there. It's saved so many lives."
Eisenberg is also a cast member with Theater of War, a performing arts non-profit that presents readings of Sophocles’ Ajax and Philoctetes to military and civilian communities across the United States and Europe. "As an actor, sometimes you feel limited by the role you're in; stories without much meaning. [Theatre of War] allows you do something that has more substance and benefits people... It's a greater purpose than just entertainment," Eisenberg said of the organization.
Eisenberg also works in performing for Voices of a People's History of the United States, which is an organization that works to "encourage civic engagement and to further history education by bringing the rich history of the United States to life through public readings of primary-source materials." He read Howard Zinn's "The Problem is Civil Disobedience" (1970) for Voices of a People's History as part of "NYU Portraits" 2011 event. Eisenberg is involved with Keep America Beautiful, which "[engages] individuals to take greater responsibility for improving their community environments," as well as Shoe Revolt, which is a "hybrid start-up company that auctions celeb shoes to raise funds to deploy a social franchising model which aims to educate, engage, and empower youth to take the lead in the fight against domestic sex trafficking through peer-to-peer involvement, training, activism and social enterprise development."
Eisenberg's short story "Marv Albert is My Therapist" appeared in The New Yorker in 2013. Eisenberg has written other short humor pieces for The New Yorker's "Shouts & Murmurs" column, as well as for McSweeney's. These pieces, as well as others, were included in Eisenberg's debut novel, Bream Gives Me Hiccups, which was released on September 8, 2015.
Eisenberg's short stories via The New Yorker (PUB)
Eisenberg's short stories via McSweeney's (PUB)
