The Haunted Hathaways is a Nickelodeon sitcom television series that began airing on July 13, 2013 and ended on March 5, 2015. It tells the story of a single mother and her two daughters who move into a home occupied by three ghosts, a single father and his two sons. The two families solve their problems using the ghost powers and normal human ways. The show's first season was originally going to consist of 20 episodes, but on August 21, 2013, the first season was picked up for 6 more episodes, bringing the first season up to 26 episodes. On October 21, 2013, Nickelodeon renewed The Haunted Hathaways for a second season. The second season started airing on June 28, 2014. The series was filmed at Paramount Studios in Hollywood, California. The last episode aired on March 5, 2015.
The series tells the story of a mother named Michelle Hathaway moving her two daughters, Taylor and Frankie, to New Orleans where they open a bakery. They come to find out that the house is haunted by Ray Preston and his two sons, Miles and Louie as they are actually ghosts. The families learn how to live with each other using their ghostly powers and normal human ways.
Amber Montana as Taylor Hathaway, the daughter of Michelle Hathaway, and the older sister of Frankie Hathaway. As seen in the first episode, she is a talented gymnast who cares about her work and is easily agitated by her family and the Prestons.
Curtis Harris as Miles Preston, the older son of Ray and older brother of Louie. He is the most well-mannered of the Preston ghosts, and tries the hardest to socialize with humans, especially Taylor. Miles does his best to help Taylor with her problems, but he tends to do more harm than good.
Benjamin Flores, Jr. as Louie Preston, the son of Ray Preston, and is Miles Preston's younger brother. He tends to be rude and a little bit on the sarcastic side. He loves haunting and scaring people, though he hasn't quite mastered it yet. Louie doesn't understand why the Hathaways have to live with them in their house and isn't always so nice to the Hathaways, but he gradually accepts them and becomes especially good friends with Frankie.
Breanna Yde as Frankie Hathaway, the daughter of Michelle Hathaway, and the younger sister of Taylor Hathaway. She is considered strange by her peers, and embraces the idea of living with ghosts. Frankie doesn't easily get along with her older sister, Taylor, because they have different ways of dealing with things. Frankie and Louie have a complicated relationship because Frankie is often better at scaring people than he is, but they are still best friends. In the episode "Haunted Doll" it was revealed that her full name was Francesca.
Ginifer King as Michelle Hathaway, the good-hearted single mother of Taylor and Frankie. She is divorced and along with her two daughters lives with the Prestons. Michelle is a skilled baker who owns a bakery called Pie Squared. Michelle tries to get along with her daughter, Taylor, but they always think of things differently and their problems tend to be controversial. Michelle and Ray also find a complicated relationship because of their different styles of parenting.
Chico Benymon as Ray Preston, the father of Miles and Louie. As seen in the first episode, he plays the saxophone. Ray prefers a laid-back lifestyle, so he isn't very good at disciplining his sons when they misbehave.
Brec Bassinger as Emma, a girl on Taylor's gymnastics team and goes to Taylor's school who tends to not understand much of what people around her do understand. Emma is also very clumsy and ditzy.
Juliette Angelo as Meadow, a girl who joins Taylor's gymnastics team and becomes Taylor's best friend. After an accident in the Hathaways' house, she gains the ability to see ghosts and soon becomes friends with Miles, not knowing that Miles is a ghost. She, however, does find out about Miles and her new-found ability and is fine with it (for the most part).
JT Neal as Scott Tomlinson, a boy who Taylor has a crush on and then becomes her boyfriend.
Kayla Maisonet as Lilly, a girl who attends the same school Taylor Hathaway attends and is on the school's gymnastics team. She does not appear in season 2.
Artie O'Daly as Clay Bannister, a very well-known food critic who gives reviews on bakeries in the New Orleans area.
Ava Cantrell as Penelope Pritchard, a girl who attends the same school as Frankie Hathaway and is known for her crazy obsession with dolls. She is very wealthy and she doesn't like Frankie that much.
Kim Yarbrough as Madame Lebeuf, a mystical and spiritual woman who makes a living by exorcising unwanted ghosts.
Fred Stoller as Mr. Dobson, Louie's teacher at Ichabod Crane Academy.
The series premiered on July 13, 2013 and scored 3.3 million viewers, after a brand new Sam & Cat. The next episode that aired scored 2.8 million viewers. As of November 2014, the most watched episode is Pilot with 3.3 million viewers. The second most watched episode is Haunted Sleepover with 2.8 million viewers, and the least watched episode is Haunted Revenge with 1.23 million viewers. In Australia "Pilot" received 47,000 viewers making it the third most watched Nickelodeon broadcast that day. The same episode received 138,000 viewers in the United Kingdom.
The Haunted Hathaways has generally received a positive reception. David Hinckley of the New York Daily News says that it has the traditions of "smashing two very different families together" and "having a normal level of sitcom zaniness compounded by the unexpected appearance of the supernatural." He enjoyed the idea of a traditional sitcom every once in a while. Sonia Saraiya of The A.V. Club claims it to be "unique and slightly convoluted" She also said that it has an "interesting" gender and racial breakdown.
The series originally premiered on July 13, 2013 on Nickelodeon. It premiered on YTV on October 7, 2013 and Nickelodeon (Australia and New Zealand) on November 25, 2013. It premiered on Nickelodeon (UK and Ireland) on November 5, 2013. Nickelodeon (Southeast Asia) premiered the series on November 18, 2013 and Nickelodeon (Africa) on December 9, 2013.
Reruns of the series aired on Nickelodeon until March 19, 2015. The series returned with reruns on May 4, 2015 in the US on Nicktoons and TeenNick.
List of ghost films
