Aimee Richelle Teegarden (born October 10, 1989) is an American actress, model and producer. She starred as Julie Taylor in the NBC drama Friday Night Lights from 2006 to 2011. In 2014, she starred as Emery Whitehill in The CW's short-lived science fiction romantic drama Star-Crossed.
Teegarden was born and raised in Downey, California, a suburb of Los Angeles. She graduated from high school through independent study at the age of sixteen.
Teegarden has modeled for campaigns including Alltel, Hollister, Old Navy, Tommy Hilfiger, and YMI Jeans. She has made several television appearances including Cold Case, Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide, and Disney Channel's Hannah Montana.
Teegarden joined the cast of the NBC drama Friday Night Lights, opposite Kyle Chandler and Connie Britton, as Julie Taylor, the elder daughter of Eric Taylor (Chandler), a high school head football coach, and Tami Taylor (Britton), a high school guidance counselor. The show ran for five seasons from October 3, 2006 to February 9, 2011.
On August 24, 2007, during the Miss Teen USA 2007 pagean, Teegarden posed the question ("Recent polls have shown a fifth of Americans can't locate the U.S. on a world map. Why do you think this is?") that led to an infamous reply by contestant Caitlin Upton.
In 2009, Teegarden guest-starred in three episodes of the CW’s 90210 as Rhonda, a West Beverly student who crosses paths with Ethan Ward. The same year, Teegarden guest-starred on Legend of the Seeker, portraying a teenage girl who just found out she was a confessor, and she appeared in episodes of CSI: Miami and CSI: Crime Scene Investigation.
In 2010, it was reported she had been cast to star as Amanda Miles in the Warner Premiere and Dolphin Entertainment action webseries Aim High with Jackson Rathbone. The show discusses Facebook being the first "social series" ever created and premiered on October 18, 2011. The webseries continued for the second season on December 9, 2013 on Crackle.
In 2011, Teegarden co-starred in the slasher film Scream 4 as a horror loving high schooler. Also in 2011, Teegarden starred opposite Thomas McDonell in the Disney film Prom as Nova Prescott, an overachieving high school senior, bound for Georgetown University after graduation, trying to put together the prom while dealing with love, heartbreak, and pressure from her parents, and falling in love with the school bad boy Jesse Richter (McDonnell). In May 2011, she was named "TV Actress of the Year" by Young Hollywood Awards for her work on Friday Night Lights. In June 2011, she signed on to co-star in the war drama Love and Honor, with Liam Hemsworth and Teresa Palmer. Teegarden also played Abby in Beneath the Darkness.
In February 2012, Teegarden had won a role with AnnaSophia Robb in Life at These Speeds opposite Douglas Booth. The same month, she was cast as America Singer in The CW pilot The Selection. However, the pilot was not picked up to air in the fall. It was reworked and expected to be picked up for a midseason replacement or the following season and the second pilot was recorded, but it was also passed by the network.
Teegarden began starring in The CW science fiction romantic drama Star-Crossed as Emery Whitehill. The show ran for one season from February 17 to May 12, 2014.
In March 2015, Teegarden signed on to co-star in F. Javier Gutiérrez's horror film Rings.
Teegarden is a vegan. She was a member of Job's Daughters International and is a Past Honored Queen of Bethel No. 244 in Downey, California. In 2008 she was awarded "Honorary International Sweetheart of DeMolay International", a young men's group associated with Job's Daughters. She supports Oceana, a non-profit ocean advocacy group.
