Friðrik Þór Friðriksson (born 12 May 1954; pronounced [ˈfrɪðrɪk ˈθouːr ˈfrɪðrɪxsɔn]), sometimes credited as Fridrik Thor Fridriksson, is an Icelandic film director.
He started his film making career with experimental films and documentaries in the early 1980s. He founded The Icelandic Film Corporation in 1990, it has since become Iceland's most important film production company. The company produces his films and works with other Icelandic directors as well as producers. His international reputation led the company to build a network of internationally well-established co-production partner companies, including Lars von Trier's Zentropa and most recently, Francis Ford Coppola's American Zoetrope. His second feature Children of Nature (1991) was nominated for an Oscar as Best Foreign Language Film and it took the Grand Prize at the 4th Yubari International Fantastic Film Festival in February 1993.
Friðrik also starred in Lars von Trier's 2006 comedy film The Boss of it All.
He grew up in Iceland in the sixties and so was largely influenced by American films. Despite that it was exposure to the work of Akira Kurosawa, John Ford and Nicholas Ray which proved crucial in his decision to become a filmmaker. He has worked with two of Iceland's most acclaimed novelists and script-writers. His work with Einar Már Guðmundsson includes Children Of Nature, Angels of the Universe, and Moviedays. His work with Einar Kárason includes White Whales, Devils Island, and Falcons Friðrik Þór Friðriksson is noted for the strong visual style of his films including stunning images. These films are both deeply personal and strongly rooted in the culture of Iceland, often depict characters at the crossroads of tradition and modernity. They are said to combine a wry sense of humour with a genuine solidarity with the characters.
His newest work includes the documentary A Mother's Courage: Talking Back to Autism, locally named the Sunshine Boy, premiered at the Toronto film festival 2009, and his latest feature film Mamma Gógó, now pre-selected for candidature for European film awards.
Mother Courage has been nominated for the Voice award 2010.
Friðrik Þór Friðriksson is also interested in football and is a big supporter of Fram Reykjavik in football.
