Scandal (1989) is a British drama film, a fictionalised account of the Profumo Affair based on 1987 Anthony Summers' book Honeytrap.
Starring Joanne Whalley as Christine Keeler and John Hurt as Stephen Ward, personalities at the heart of the affair, the film details the scandal that, in 1963, rocked the government of British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan and may have contributed to the defeat of the ruling Conservative Party at the following year's general election.
The cast also includes Ian McKellen as John Profumo, Britt Ekland as Mariella Novotny, Bridget Fonda as Mandy Rice-Davies, Leslie Phillips as Lord Astor, and Roland Gift as Johnny Edgecombe.
The film's theme song "Nothing Has Been Proved" was written and produced by Pet Shop Boys and sung by Dusty Springfield.
The film was screened out of competition at the 1989 Cannes Film Festival. The film's original trailer on UK television commercials never showed any clips of the film but just a blank screen featuring the word "SCANDAL" in white text, with a voiceover saying "It's a scandal! Keep watching!" Another trailer featuring clips was subsequently shown, as a follow-on from the original.
An English bon-vivant osteopath is enchanted with a young exotic dancer and invites her to live with him. He serves as friend and mentor, and through his wide range of contacts and his parties she and her friend meet and date members of the Conservative Party. A scandal develops when her affair with the Minister of War comes to public attention.
John Hurt as Stephen Ward
Joanne Whalley as Christine Keeler
Bridget Fonda as Mandy Rice-Davies
Ian McKellen as John Profumo
Leslie Phillips as Lord Astor
Britt Ekland as Mariella Novotny
Daniel Massey as Mervyn Griffith-Jones
Roland Gift as Johnny Edgecombe
Jean Alexander as Mrs. Keeler
Deborah Grant as Valerie Hobson
Alex Norton as Detective Inspector
Ronald Fraser as Justice Marshall
Paul Brooke as John, Detective Sgt.
Jeroen Krabbé as Eugene Ivanov
Keith Allen as Kevin, Reporter Sunday Pictorial
Ralph Brown as Paul Mann
Iain Cuthbertson as Lord Hailsham
Johnny Shannon as Peter Rachman
Leon Herbert as Lucky Gordon
Part of Scandal was filmed at Brook Drive SE11, 42 Bathurst Mews, Bayswater, London, although Stephen Ward's house was actually at 17 Wimpole Mews, Paddington, London.
The soundtrack, and soundtrack album, included a specially written song by the Pet Shop Boys "Nothing Has Been Proved" for Dusty Springfield.
The film received positive reviews. At the movie review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, Scandal received an overall approval rating of 91% based on 32 reviews.
It was rated number 1 in the Top 10 Best British Films by the Record Press website in February 2013.
The movie made a comfortable profit.
Scandal at the Internet Movie Database
Scandal at Box Office Mojo