The World in His Arms is a 1952 seafaring adventure film made by Universal-International. It was directed by Raoul Walsh and produced by Aaron Rosenberg from a screenplay by Borden Chase and Horace McCoy. It is based on the novel by Rex Beach. The music score was by Frank Skinner and the cinematography by Russell Metty.
The film stars Gregory Peck, Ann Blyth and Anthony Quinn, with John McIntire, Carl Esmond, Andrea King, Eugenie Leontovich, Hans Conried, and Sig Ruman.
In 1850 San Francisco, Russian Countess Marina Selanova (Blyth) flees from an arranged marriage to Prince Semyon (Esmond). She books passage with "Portugee" (Quinn) to Sitka, where her uncle Governor Ivan Vorashilov (Sig Ruman) can protect her.
When Portugee's bitter rival, Captain Jonathan Clark, "the Boston-man“ (Peck), frees his shanghaied crew, she sends a man to negotiate with him instead. However, Jonathan hates all Russians and turns down the offer. In desperation, Marina goes to the party he is throwing and, pretending to be the Countess's companion, gets him to change his mind. As he shows her the sights of the city in one whirlwind night, they fall in love. Jonathan proposes marriage and she gladly accepts.
However, Prince Semyon finds Marina and takes her to Sitka. Believing Marina has tricked him, Jonathan races Portugee to Alaska, recklessly wagering his ship on who gets there first. Jonathan wins, but that doesn't stop Portugee from trying to steal his ship anyway. Unluckily, while both crews are brawling, a Russian gunboat appears and takes them all captive to Sitka.
Once there, Prince Semyon forces Marina to agree to marry him in return for Jonathan's freedom. Jonathan and his men double back, rescue Marina, and sail away.
Gregory Peck as Captain Jonathan Clark
Ann Blyth as Countess Marina Selanova
Anthony Quinn as "Portugee"
John McIntire as Deacon Greathouse, Jonathan's second in command
Carl Esmond as Prince Semyon
Sig Ruman as General Ivan Vorashilov
Andrea King as Mamie
Eugenie Leontovich as Anna Selanova
Bill Radovitch as Ogeechuk, Jonathan's Eskimo crewman
Rhys Williams as Eben Cleggett
Bryan Forbes as William Cleggett
Hans Conried as Eustace, hotel clerk
The film was the eighth most popular movie at the British box office in 1952.
Versions of the film have been released as a VHS videotape and as a region 1 DVD.
