Sleepover is a 2004 American teen film directed by Joe Nussbaum and starring Alexa Vega, Mika Boorem, Jane Lynch, Sam Huntington, Sara Paxton, Brie Larson, Steve Carell and Jeff Garlin.
On the last day of 8th grade before their freshman year in high school, Julie Corky (Alexa Vega) has a slumber party with 3 best friends, Hannah Carlson (Mika Boorem), Farrah James (Scout Taylor-Compton), and Yancy Williams (Kallie Flynn Childress). As a quartet, they end up having the adventure of their lives. A group of popular girls, led by a former friend of Julie's, Stacie Blake (Sara Paxton), challenge the girls to a scavenger hunt. The prize will be a coveted lunchtime seat near the fountain in high school. The losers will have to sit at tables near the school's dumpsters.
The list includes things like a picture of the girls with a date inside an exclusive night club, the insignia from a local private security firm, and a pair of boxers from Steve Philips, (Julie's crush), and to dress an Old Navy mannequin with their own clothing. The girls sneak out of Julie's house, and use Yancy's father's smart car to travel to various locations and get the required objects. Along the way they dodge a Patroltec security guard (Steve Carell) and try to keep Julie's parents (Jane Lynch and Jeff Garlin) from discovering that they are gone. During their scavenger hunt, Steve Philips sees Julie skateboarding in a dress and is impressed. Later the girls meet up at the school dance, but both have acquired all the items on the list.
Stacie suggests a tie breaker, where the group which is able to get the crown from the homecoming king or queen will win. Steve Philips ends up named homecoming king and picks Julie as his partner for a victory dance, giving her the crown and ensuring victory for her friends. As Julie and Steve dance, the other girls dance with each other. Yancy shares a dance with a boy who moved speakers for a summer job and who she had met earlier in the night. Stacie catches her boyfriend Todd dancing with another girl who claims that she has been Todd's girlfriend for six months. After the two break up, Stacie shares a dance with a scruffy skater friend of Julie's.
After the dance, Julie and Steve are about to kiss when they get a call from Julie's brother that their mother is headed home. The girls race home and pretend to be sleeping just as Julie's parents check on them. The next morning at breakfast, Julie's mom confronts her asking "exactly" what they did last night, showing Julie the scarf she had dropped in the Cosmo club. Surprisingly, Mrs. Corky is not mad but confesses it is difficult to believe how fast Julie is growing up. Then Julie says goodbye to her friends and finds Steve waiting inside her tree fort, where the two share a kiss. The film ends with a scene of Stacie and her friends, now in high school, eating their lunch by the school dumpsters among the trash and the social rejects.
Alexa Vega as Julie Corky, a fourteen-year-old girl who has a sleepover with her best friends to celebrate the summer.
Mika Boorem as Hannah Carlson, a teenager who is the best friend of Julie Corky, and ends up moving to Vancouver. She is somewhat the leader of the group because of her leadership and determination.
Jane Lynch as Gabby Corky, the mother of Julie and Ren Corky, and the wife of Jay Corky. Gabby is an overprotective mother and doesn't want her daughter, Julie, to ever get into trouble, but during the sleepover she has plans of her own to go to "The Cosmo Club."
Sara Paxton as Staci Blake, is a typical middle school mean girl, her and her best friend Liz, plan a scavenger hunt for her and Julie and her friends, which Hannah ends up changing the rules so Julie, Farrah, and Yancy, can sit at "The Fountain" freshman year of high school.
Sam Huntington as Ren Corky, is a grown man who still lives at the Corky house when he should be at college, according to Julie.
Scout Taylor-Compton as Farrah James, is Hannah and Julie's best friend and is known for being the fashionista of the group.
Brie Larson as Liz Daniels, is the queen bee of the eighth grade, she is the best friend of Staci, but Liz is a little bit more popular. Liz writes down almost everything on the scavenger hunt list.
Kallie Flynn Childress as Yancy Williams, is a slightly over-weight teenage girl, who is very self-conscious and worries about what people think about her, until she meets Peter, an older guy who treats Yancy like she is the most perfect and important girl in the world.
Sean Faris as Steve Phillips, the local hottie of high school, at first doesn't notice Julie, but then later notices her after he sees her skateboarding with a dress on.
Steve Carell as Officer Sherman Shiner, Sherman is one of the those cops or security guards who the only reason are security guards is to boss people around, he has his eye on Julie and her friends during their sleepover because of the loud noise and traveling through town.
Jeff Garlin as Mr. Corky, Jay is Julie and Ren's father, who has his heart depending on fixing the water in their house during the sleepover.
Evan Peters as Russell "SpongeBob" Hayes, Spongebob is very clumsy skateboarder who has his heart set on making Julie fall in love with him.
Hunter Parrish as Lance Gregory, a boy.
Alice Greczyn as Linda, a jealous girl.
Thad Luckinbill as Todd, Staci's ex-boyfriend.
Douglas Smith as Gregg, a guy.
Katija Pevec as Molly, a girl.
Johnny Sneed as Mr. Corrado, Julie, Hannah, Farrah, Yancy, Staci, and Liz's teacher.
Eileen April Boylan as Jenna Allen, a high schooler.
Ryan Slattery as Peter, Yancy's love interest.
Summer Glau as Ticket Girl, a lonely high school girl.
Max Van Ville as Skater Dude, a kid.
Shane Hunter as Scooter, a teenage kid.
The film opened at #10 in the box office with $4,171,226. The film would later make $9,436,390 in the United States and $712,563 internationally, resulting in a $10,148,953 gross worldwide, on a $10 million budget.
"Imaginary Superstar" - Skye Sweetnam
"Freeze Frame" - Jump5
"I Want Everything" - Hope 7
"That's What Girls Do" - No Secrets
"Stuck" - Allister
"Havin' Fun" - Planet Melvin
"Remember" - Gabriel Mann
"We Close Our Eyes" - Allister
"Hole in the Head" - Sugababes
"Next Big Me" - Verbalicious
"Heaven Is a Place on Earth" - Becky Baeling
"Wannabe" - Spice Girls
Scholastic Inc. released a novelization of the story in May 2004. The novel was written by American fantasy and science fiction author Suzanne Weyn.
