Adam Paul Scott (born April 3, 1973) is an American actor, comedian, director, screenwriter, producer, and podcaster. He is best known for his role as Ben Wyatt in the NBC sitcom Parks and Recreation. He has also appeared as Derek in the film Step Brothers, and Henry Pollard in the Starz sitcom Party Down.
Scott was born in Santa Cruz, California, the son of Anne (née Quartara) and Douglas Scott. Following the release of the film The Lost Boys, Adam relocated in Santa Cruz from ages 9 to 18.  He has two older siblings, Shannon and David. Scott has said that David "looks like me but is far more cerebral and inherited the intellect of our parents", both of whom are retired teachers. He graduated from Harbor High School and the American Academy of Dramatic Arts in Pasadena, California.
Scott has appeared in several feature films, including Hellraiser: Bloodline (1996), Star Trek: First Contact (1996), The Lesser Evil (1998), High Crimes (2002), The Aviator (2004), Torque (2004), Monster-in-Law (2005), Who Loves the Sun (2006), Knocked Up (2007), Step Brothers (2008), August (2008), Piranha 3-D (2010), and Leap Year (2010).
Scott's name appears next to Jon Hamm's name in the film Anchorman in one of the broadcast's credits. In an appearance on G4's Attack of the Show program on April 21, 2011, he confirmed that this was due to his and Hamm's friendship with producer Shauna Robertson, who put their names in the credits as an Easter egg. He played Ted Hendricks, Walter Mitty's detestable corporate boss, in the 2013 remake of The Secret Life of Walter Mitty.
Scott appeared in the films Our Idiot Brother (2011) as Jeremy and Bachelorette. He also starred as Jason Fryman in Friends with Kids (2012). He starred as Caleb Sinclaire in the 2010 film The Vicious Kind, a more dramatic role than his previous comedic endeavours, for which Scott was nominated for an Independent Spirit Award for best actor. The film itself received positive reviews, and he won two individual awards at two separate film festivals. He starred in the film Passenger Side, released on DVD on October 26, 2010.
Scott's film A.C.O.D. premiered at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival. In 2015, he worked as executive producer and portrayed Alex in the comedy film The Overnight. He also co-starred in the Christmas comedy slasher film Krampus.
On television, he appeared as Griff Hawkins in the series Boy Meets World and Josh on Party of Five, as well as David's love interest, Ben Cooper, on Six Feet Under. He played Palek on the HBO drama Tell Me You Love Me (2007). Scott played a cocaine-addicted, delirious baseball front office representative in the first and second seasons of the HBO series Eastbound & Down. From 2009 to 2010 he appeared on the Starz network show Party Down. His role in Party Down earned him an Entertainment Weekly Ewwy nomination for Best Actor in a Comedy Series in 2009.
In 2010, Scott joined the cast of NBC's acclaimed comedy series Parks and Recreation, in which he played Ben Wyatt, a state auditor who arrives in the fictional town of Pawnee, Indiana to evaluate the town's funds. He appeared as a guest star along with Rob Lowe in the second season before becoming a main character for the remainder of the series. The show's seventh and final season concluded in February 2015.
Scott has appeared in the Adult Swim comedy Childrens Hospital. He was also on the show NTSF:SD:SUV::, in the episode "The Risky Business of Being Alone in Your Home", and the annual Adult Swim special The Greatest Event in Television History, which he also created and produced. Scott has also appeared in the Comedy Central television show Nick Swardson's Pretend Time, as a newscaster in the episode "Relapse into Refreshment". He has appeared in a series of commercials for ESPN's Sunday Night Baseball.
Scott is the co-host and co-creator of the Earwolf podcast U Talkin' U2 To Me? with Scott Aukerman. The series is introduced at the outset of each episode as "the comprehensive and encyclopedic compendium of all things U2," but it generally uses discussion of the band as a jumping off point for improv and absurdist humor. Scott has also been a guest on numerous podcasts, including Comedy Bang! Bang!, How Did This Get Made?, and Kevin Pollak's Chat Show.
