Berlin, Berlin is a television series produced for the ARD. It aired in Germany from 2002 to 2005 Tuesdays through Fridays at 6:50PM on the German public TV network Das Erste. The show won both national and international awards.
The series tells the story of Lolle (played by Felicitas Woll) who, after finishing school, follows her boyfriend, Tom, from Malente to Berlin. Once there, she discovers that Tom has been cheating on her with another girl. Rather than move back home, Lolle decides to stay in Berlin with her cousin, Sven (played by Jan Sosniok), his best friend Hart (Matthias Klimsa) and Rosalie (Sandra Borgmann). At the end of season one Lolle and Sven fall in love with each other, even though they are second cousins. Their grandparents were siblings, as is revealed in the first episode when Daniel, Sven's son, asks Lolle how she is related to him. Before getting into a relationship with Lolle, Sven instead decides to go back to his former wife, Silvia, because of Daniel. Season one also follows Lolle's relationship with the ex-girlfriend, Rosalie, of Tom's new girlfriend. At the end of season one, Rosalie, an actress, leaves Germany to go to the USA and pursue a new life.
At the beginning of season two Lolle, desperate after losing Sven to Silvia and Rosalie's departure to the USA, she finds a new friend with Rosalie's former girlfriend, Sara (Rhea Harder). At first Lolle wants to convince Sven to love her, but he seems to be undecided and is unsure of what he should do. She then meets Alex, an art student, and they become a couple. Sven separates from Silvia once more, however, and is now free to be with Lolle, but she replies that she should stay with Alex. At the end of season two, she realizes that she loves Sven too, and attempts being with both Sven and Alex. Hart also begins to acknowledge his love for Sarah, and after a series of problems, they get together.
Series One (2002)
Landflucht (Pilot)
Wie bekomme ich meinen Freund zurück
Happy Birthday, Lolle
Auf der Flucht
Rotalarm
Ich will Sandra Bullock massieren
Selbstversuch
All you need is love
Träume
Lolle und der Traumprinz
Nicht ganz koscher
Die Geliebte
Singles
Dr. Strangelove
Lesbe sein dagegen sehr
Küssen, küssen, küssen
Lolle gegen Fatman
Ich bin nicht nett
Beste Freunde
Taddi und Mr. Psycho
Cousin und Cousine
Extremsitutionen ...
Martha
Überraschungen
Eine Million
Positiv ist negativ
Series Two (2003)
Lolle allein in Berlin
Frisch verheiratet
Cinderello
Froschkönige
Höllendate
Männer sind auch nur Menschen
Malente, Malente
Eltern, früher oder später kriegen sie dich
Looking for Beinlich
Nicht fair
Wer liebt Fatman?
Big and Beautiful
Kairo
That's the way
Ex und hopp
Spieglein, Spieglein
Gegen die Uhr
20 Minuten
Ich lieb dich nicht - du liebst mich nicht
Aha
Series Three (2004)
Sven oder Alex?
Alex oder Sven
Nimm Zwei
Nicht genug
Jung, dynamisch, arbeitslos
Backe, backe Kuchen
Mütter und Töchter
Ziemlich ähnlich
Generationen
Hochzeitsspiele
Svenja
Täuschen, tarnen, küssen
Vero
Dafür sind Freunde da
Die Waffen der Frauen
Die Geister, die ich rief
Noch mal mit Gefühl
Daily Talk
Traumjob
Wickie
Series Four (2005)
Stuttgart - Stuttgart
Echte Freunde
Auf den ersten Blick
Angst ist blöd
Happy Family
Schwein gehabt
Liebe ist…
Rache ist…
Was wäre wenn
Schicksal
Silvia
Rituale
Held des Jahres
Sei Hart
Das Hochzeitskleid
Deus ex machina
Hormone sind doof
Weekend auf dem Lande
Die Hochzeit
Melbourne, Melbourne (Finale)
In 2004 the series won an International Emmy Award in the category "Best Comedy" for Episode 47.
