Brittany Leanna "Britt" Robertson (born April 18, 1990) is an American actress. She began acting as a child at the Greenville Little Theater in South Carolina and she made her screen debut as the younger version of the title character in an episode of Sheena in 2000. She made a guest appearance on Power Rangers Time Force the following year and received a Young Artist Award nomination for Best Performance in a TV Movie, Miniseries, or Special - Leading Young Actress for her screen debut in The Ghost Club (2003). Robertson went on to have roles in Growing Pains: Return of the Seavers (2004),Keeping Up with the Steins (2006), Dan in Real Life (2007), The Tenth Circle (2008), Mother and Child (2009), Avalon High (2010), Scream 4 (2011) and The First Time (2011).
Robertson played the lead role of Lux Cassidy in the television drama series Life Unexpected (2010–11), which was cancelled in its second season despite positive reviews. She also had a leading role in the supernatural teen drama television series The Secret Circle (2011–12), but it was also cancelled after its first season. In 2013, she landed a role in the main cast of the science fiction mystery television series Under the Dome, which she played until 2014. She had subsequent roles in the films Delivery Man (2013) and Ask Me Anything (2014), for which she won the Best Actress award at the Nashville Film Festival and she was awarded the Boston Film Festival Award for Best Supporting Actress for her performance in White Rabbit (2013).
Robertson received wider recognition in 2015 after landing the roles of Sophia Danko in The Longest Ride and Casey Newton in Tomorrowland. For the former, she was nominated for the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress - Drama and for the latter, she was nominated for the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress – Sci-Fi/Fantasy. In 2016, she starred in the films Mr. Church, alongside Eddie Murphy, and Mother's Day, alongside Jennifer Aniston and Julia Roberts, and is set to appear in the upcoming science fiction romance film The Space Between Us. Since 2011, Robertson has been in a relationship with actor Dylan O'Brien.
Robertson was born in Charlotte, North Carolina, the daughter of Beverly (née Hayes) and Ryan Robertson. Robertson grew up in Greenville, South Carolina. She is the oldest of seven children; her mother and stepfather have three children (2 girls, 1 boy) and her father and stepmother also have three children (1 girl, 2 boys).
When she was 14 years old, Robertson moved from North Carolina to Los Angeles to audition for TV pilots. Her grandmother, Shuler Robertson, came with her. Robertson said that they would knit together during down-time on set. She has been living on her own since her grandmother returned to North Carolina when Robertson was sixteen. They remain close. She also stayed in Chester, South Carolina with her grandparents, Shuler and Jerry, for a couple of months while filming The Ghost Club.
Robertson first appeared before an audience when performing various roles on stage at the Greenville Little Theater in her home town. At age twelve, she began making extended trips to Los Angeles to audition for roles in television series and landed a role in a television pilot for a series which was never picked up by a network. Her first big break came when she was selected to play Michelle Seaver in the Growing Pains: Return of the Seavers. She landed the role of playing Steve Carell's teenage daughter, Cara Burns, in the 2007 film Dan in Real Life. Robertson appeared in CSI: Crime Scene Investigation in the episode "Go to Hell", and had a role as a recurring character in the CBS television series Swingtown.
In 2008, she played the main character in a Lifetime original film, Trixie Stone, based on Jodi Picoult's novel, The Tenth Circle, followed by other television roles.
In 2009, she played a small role as DJ in The Alyson Stoner Project. She also made a guest appearance on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit in the episode "Babes" as Tina Bernardi, a Catholic teen who gets pregnant in a pact. In 2010, she starred in The CW's series Life Unexpected as Lux Cassidy, a teenager who, while in the process of being emancipated, gets back in her birth parents' lives. The show, while set in Portland, Oregon was actually filmed in Vancouver, British Columbia. In late autumn 2010, she starred as Allie Pennington in the Disney Channel original film Avalon High, which is based on Meg Cabot's book of the same name.
Robertson played Cassie Blake in The CW's 2011 television series The Secret Circle, but the series was cancelled in 2012 after its first season. That same year, she starred in the film The First Time. In 2013, Robertson was cast as Angie in CBS's summer series Under the Dome.
In 2014, Robertson won the Boston Film Festival Award for Best Supporting Actress for White Rabbit. In 2015, she starred with Scott Eastwood in Nicholas Sparks' film, The Longest Ride, and also played the starring role in Brad Bird's film Tomorrowland, with George Clooney and Hugh Laurie.
Robertson has been in a relationship with actor Dylan O'Brien since they met on the set of The First Time in 2011.
