People I Know is a 2002 crime drama film directed by Daniel Algrant and stars Al Pacino, Kim Basinger, and Téa Leoni.
Eli Wurman (Al Pacino) is a Jewish publicist on the out, but all he knows is how to hustle and cajole, threaten and persuade. The hazy mania of his everyday life is fuelled by a steady stream of prescription drugs and alcohol.
One night, Eli's last remaining "big client" Cary Launer (Ryan O'Neal) – an actor considering a campaign for political office – entreats Eli to take care of his latest publicity mess, a dangerous liaison with Jilli Hopper (Téa Leoni), a hard-shelled, quick-tongued television actress with a soft centre and a taste for illegal drugs. The actress takes Eli to a drug-and-sex den, a playground for the rich and famous, where she claims to be looking for a toy.
Jilli is escorted off the premises by security. As she demands to know "Where is my toy?", she finds it and tells the guards, "I got all of you now." Eli is too stoned to understand the exchange.
Eli takes her back to the hotel room, where he takes more pills and passes out right after witnessing what appears to be the actress's murder. In his opiate daze, he cannot be sure. By the next morning, the memory is buried. Eli needs to pull together a charity benefit. He also is tempted to leave New York for good with his former sister-in-law, Victoria. But his work is interrupted by the police who question him and by acquaintances trying to ascertain how much Eli has seen and recalls. Eli finally realizes he is involved in something politically dangerous, and powerful forces are at play to keep his mouth shut.
As he strives to bring together the people he knows – members of the Black and Jewish communities, film stars and media – for the grand fundraiser, Eli's life is in grave danger.
Al Pacino as Eli Wurman
Kim Basinger as Victoria Gray
Ryan O'Neal as Cary Launer
Téa Leoni as Jilli Hopper
Richard Schiff as Elliot Sharansky
Bill Nunn as The Reverend Lyle Brunt
Robert Klein as Dr. Sandy Napier
Mark Webber as Ross
The film received mixed reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes it was given a rating of 43%, making it "rotten." The consensus was that the plot is derivative and incoherent, and that it does not engage the viewer. Empire gave a largely positive review, awarding four stars out of five, noting: "May be a slow-burn, but despite its lack of success elsewhere, it’s still more than worthy of its long-delayed cinema release. Discerning audiences willing to invest in the characters will soon warm to the downbeat story and Al Pacino’s subdued performance – especially the scenes he shares with Basinger." BBC called it an "intriguing but deeply flawed thriller." Time Out's review observed: "With its uncertainties of tone, this is a mess, full of misplaced performances (not least Basinger as Eli's supportive sister-in-law), misfires and moral inconsistencies. But its rebellious spirit is commendable."
