S · A: Special A (S·A(スペシャル·エー), S·A (Supesharu Ē)), also known as Special A or S.A, is a shōjo manga by Maki Minami. The series started serialization in the bimonthly magazine The Hana to Yume in 2003, and moved to the biweekly magazine Hana to Yume in 2004, after running for four chapters. The series ended after 99 chapters on March 19, 2009.
Special A has been licensed for English-language release in North America by Viz Media and in Australia and New Zealand by Madman Entertainment. The series has also been licensed in Germany, Italy, Poland, France and Taiwan.
In 2007, Hana to Yume announced an anime adaptation of Special A, animated by Gonzo and AIC; the animated series ran for 24 episodes from April 6, 2008 to September 14, 2008 in Japan.
In 2013, Hana to Yume released a single volume sequel called Special A - Street Fight.
Hikari Hanazono has always been second to Kei Takishima. When they were six years old, their pro-wrestling loving fathers introduced them to each other. Assuming that she was the best in wrestling, young Hikari challenged Kei to a wrestling match only to be thoroughly defeated by him. Ever since that fateful incident, Hikari swore to beat Kei in school grades, sporting events or any competition. To do this, she has enrolled in the same school as Kei since elementary. Now she attends Hakusenkan, an ultra elite school for the wealthy, that costs her carpenter father a lot of money. Hikari and Kei are the top two students in the school, with Kei holding firmly to that number one position. While Hikari considers Kei to be a rival and important friend, she is completely unaware that Kei has strong feelings for her.
The series primarily focuses on Hikari and her constant attempts to defeat her one and only rival, Kei, and how she finds love in their rivalry. However, Special A also follows the stories of the other five members of the S.A class – Akira Toudou, Tadashi Karino, Megumi and Jun Yamamoto, and Ryuu Tsuji – and their relationships. Yahiro Saiga and Sakura Ushikubo, two students from the rival academy Kokusen, also become recurring characters in the series.
Hakusenkan (or Private Hakusen Academy) is the best school in the prefecture. The classes are separated into A–F based on grades. The A class is only open for the top students in each grade. The top seven within the A class, from first year to third year, are known as the Special A or SA class (hence the title). The members of SA are highly respected and are often seen being elaborately greeted by other students with the exception of few that dislike the SA. The SA class has its own building, a 19th-century styled greenhouse dubbed "The School's Paradise". They also have a kitchen, where Akira makes her afternoon tea. Class attendance is optional, but Hikari is the only one who chooses to attend classes. Their uniform is also different from the standard uniform. The members of the SA have been close friends since elementary school.
Hikari Hanazono (華園 光, Hanazono Hikari) Voiced by: Yuko Goto (Japanese); Monica Rial (English)
Hikari is the accomplished protagonist of the story and is ranked 2nd in the school. She is energetic and kindhearted, but rather dense to more subtle matters, in particular love. Unlike her peers, she comes from an ordinary family and her father is a carpenter. When she was six years old she experienced her first defeat and humiliation when she lost to Kei Takishima in a pro-wrestling match. In order to beat Kei, Hikari convinced her father to allow her to attend Kei's prestigious elite school and strives to defeat Kei at anything, from academics to athletics. She is completely unaware of Kei's strong feelings towards her but later she realizes that she loves Kei.
Kei Takishima (滝島 彗, Takishima Kei) Voiced by: Jun Fukuyama (Japanese); Blake Shepard (English)
Kei is Hikari's rival and holds the 1st position in the entire school; he is good at everything he does and is always a smooth winner. Kei has been in love with Hikari since they were children, but Hikari has been too distracted by their rivalry to realize his feelings for her. While he maintains a stoic and cool facade most of the time, he loses his composure whenever Hikari is in trouble or gets too close to another boy. He is the son of the CEO of Takishima Corporation.
Jun Yamamoto (山本 純, Yamamoto Jun) Voiced by: Tsubasa Yonaga (Japanese); Kirby Brister (English)
Jun is ranked 3rd in school and is the son of a music producer and a talented vocalist. Like Megumi, he is very possessive of Ryuu and seems to worry Ryuu as much as he worries about the two of them. Jun is rather shy around girls, which resulted in a split personality that enables him to charm almost all women effortlessly. Unlike the rest of his friends, he tends to be quiet and rarely gets involved with any disputes. He also becomes the object of Sakura Ushikubo's love, who is introduced halfway through the anime series. Jun later returns Sakura's love.
Megumi Yamamoto (山本 芽, Yamamoto Megumi) Voiced by: Ayahi Takagaki (Japanese); Brittney Karbowski (English)
Megumi holds the 4th position in school and is the older twin sister of Jun. She and her brother are very close to Ryuu, whom they have known since they were children. Megumi refuses to speak so as to preserve her singing voice and writes what she wishes for people to know on a sketchpad. When she sings, her voice is so devastatingly powerful at a close range that everyone who stands near ends up dazed and disoriented afterward. She develops feelings for Yahiro Saiga, and they later become a couple.
Tadashi Karino (狩野 宙, Karino Tadashi) Voiced by: Hiro Shimono (Japanese); Andrew Love (English)
Tadashi ranks 5th in school and is the son of the school's director. He suffers from a bit of wanderlust, likes to travel alone and do whatever he wants or sees fit. Tadashi seems to end up as the character most comically attacked (frequently by Akira) because of his careless comments or reckless behavior. He enjoys eating sweets, especially food made by Akira. Though Tadashi loves Akira, he isn't certain how to tell her directly, though they later manage to become a couple after realizing they feel the same way for one another.
Akira Toudou (東堂 明, Tōdō Akira) Voiced by: Hitomi Nabatame (Japanese); Luci Christian (English)
Akira holds the 6th position in school and is very fond of Hikari; as a result, she is very protective of her--especially when it comes to Kei and Hikari being together. She loves afternoon tea and is very fond of cute girls. Despite being in love with Tadashi, Akira constantly beats him up (which he takes humorously). She is the daughter of the owner of an airline company. She and Kei were childhood friends of Yahiro, though their friendship broke apart because of Yahiro's controlling behavior.
Ryuu Tsuji (辻 竜, Tsuji Ryū) Voiced by: Kazuma Horie (Japanese); Chris Patton (English)
Ryuu ranks 7th in the school and is the son of the CEO of a sports car company. He is an animal lover and is very good at handling children. The twins are unusually close to him because they have been together since childhood. It is hinted that perhaps he is smarter than 7th place (he is shown in an episode to finish 1000 questions in 10 minutes and get them all correct), but spends the majority of the time during exams worrying about Jun and Megumi, who tend to become bored or sleep during tests. He also gets extremely angry when his friends' happiness is threatened.
On February 23, 2007, a Special A drama CD was released in Japan. It focuses on Valentine's Day.
Voice cast:
Hikari Hanazono: Masumi Asano
Kei Takishima: Kenichi Suzumura
Tadashi Karino: Masakazu Morita
Akira Toudou: Yuu Asakawa
Jun Yamamoto: Souichiro Hoshi
Megumi Yamamoto: Tamaki Nakanishi
Ryuu Tsuji: Hirofumi Nojima
Yahiro Saiga: Daisuke Namikawa
Sakura Ushikubo: Yumi Kakazu
Aoi Ogata: Daisuke Ono
A second drama CD was released on June 18, 2008. It focuses around the boys of the S.A class. The CD also includes background music tracks from the anime. A third drama CD was released in August 2008, focusing on the girls of the S.A class and includes more tracks of the background music from the anime. Both drama CDs use the anime cast.
Hikari Hanazono: Yuko Goto
Kei Takishima: Jun Fukuyama
Tadashi Karino: Hiro Shimono
Akira Toudou: Hitomi Nabatame
Jun Yamamoto: Tsubasa Yonaga
Megumi Yamamoto: Ayahi Takagaki
Ryuu Tsuji: Kazuma Horie
Sakura Ushikubo: Natsuko Kuwatani
In 2007's 21st issue of Hana to Yume, it was announced that S.A would have a 24 episode anime adaptation. The anime began airing in Japan on April 6, 2008.
The anime has been picked up for release in North America by Sentai Filmworks; it is distributed by Section23 Films. The first part of season 1 came out on November 10, 2009, and the second collection was released on January 19, 2010. A complete collection was released on April 4, 2011. The series was re-issued again featuring a new English dub on July 16, 2013. In Italy was broadcast on Rai 4 on May 22, 2011 at 10.30am and ended October 30, 2011.
1st opening theme
"Special Days" (episodes 1 - 12)
Performed by Yuko Goto, Hitomi Nabatame and Ayahi Takagaki
1st ending theme
"Hidamari no Gate" (陽だまりのゲート) (episodes 1 - 12, 24)
Performed by Jun Fukuyama, Hiro Shimono, Tsubasa Yonaga, Kazuma Horie
2nd opening theme
"Gorgeous 4U" (episodes 13 - 24)
Performed by Jun Fukuyama, Hiro Shimono, Tsubasa Yonaga, Kazuma Horie
2nd ending theme
"Special Gyutto Good Luck!" (スペシャル☆ギュッとGood luck!) (episodes 13 - 23)
Performed by Yuko Goto, Hitomi Nabatame, and Ayahi Takagaki
The series has received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Katherine Dacey compared the central two characters as "a gender reversed Frank Butler and Annie Oakley", and noted that Kei comes off as "rather sexist". Erin Finnegan disliked the manga, because the secondary characters were poorly developed and she felt the story was misogynistic. Jennifer Dunbar enjoyed the wish-fulfilment of seeing rich kids "getting to do whatever they want" without being conceited about this, but felt the complications in the last volume were boring. Jason Thompson disliked the "action slapstick" of the first two volumes, but felt that even after the two leads became more fleshed out as characters through their romance that the series was "founded on cliches" and felt the rest of the cast was underdeveloped. Allen Moody of THEM Anime Reviews gave a more positive review of series, giving it 4 out of 5 stars and stating that although the first set of episodes focused too much on the Kei/Hikari rivalry, the later episodes were able to develop the characters more and eventually become likable in their own way.
