Scott Edward Adkins (born 17 June 1976) is an English actor and martial artist who is best known for playing Yuri Boyka in Undisputed II: Last Man Standing and Undisputed III: Redemption, Bradley Hume in Holby City, Ed Russell in Mile High and as Hector in The Expendables 2. Adkins has also appeared in Dangerfield, Hollyoaks, The Tournament TV series and many others, as well as many films.
Scott Adkins was born at Sutton Coldfield, England, on 17 June 1976. He became interested in martial arts at the age of ten when he, his father, and older brother, Craig, visited the local Judo club. His interest towards martial arts grew even more at age 14 when he adopted Bruce Lee as his idol. That same year, he started practicing taekwondo. Since age 16, Adkins has also trained in kickboxing which he holds black belt by the age of 19. He also has trained in ninjutsu, judo, Karate, jujutsu, wushu, Krav Maga, capoeira, Jeet Kune Do and gymnastics.
His first break came when he was offered a role in a Hong Kong martial arts film called Dei Seung Chui Keung (2001) (aka Extreme Challenge). Spotted by Head of The Hong Kong Stuntmen Association and director Wei Tung and English-born Hong Kong movie expert Bey Logan, Adkins found himself in the East for the first time. Scott got the chance to work with some of Hong Kong cinema's leading action directors including Woo-ping Yuen, Corey Yuen, Sammo Hung Kam-Bo and the legendary Jackie Chan. Acting roles started to come in and he was offered a guest role in BBC's Doctors (2000) filmed at Birmingham's Pebble Mill. A few episodes in BBC's EastEnders (1985) and City Central (1998), and a lead role in Sky One comedy drama Mile High (2003) followed by a regular role in BBC's Holby City (1999) as Bradley Hume, the assistant general manager of Holby General.
Starring roles in feature films soon followed with his portrayal of Talbot in Special Forces (2003) and Yuri Boyka in Undisputed II: Last Man Standing (2006). It was this film that broke him into the mainstream with his villainous portrayal of a Russian MMA underground fighter Boyka. After this Scott had guest starring roles in bigger budget films like The Bourne Ultimatum (2007) and The Tournament (2009), and played Jean-Claude Van Damme's main adversary in Sony Pictures The Shepherd: Border Patrol (2008). Adkins appears in the role of King Amphitryon in The Legend of Hercules .
In 2012, he was cast to star in Metal Hurlant chronicles, a sci-fi franco-belgium Tv show, adapted from the French comic books Metal Hurlant. He will star in 2 episodes; "King's crown" with Michael Jai White, "Second chance" in the episode "Loyal Khondor" with Karl E. Landler and John Rhys Davies, his character from "Second chance" is doing a cameo, encountering Khondor, played by Karl E. Landler, in front of an intergalactic pub. Guillaume Lubrano creator and director of the show decided to cross the universe of two originals stories.
