Acción mutante is a 1993 Spanish science fiction black comedy film co-written and directed by Álex de la Iglesia and produced by, among others, Pedro Almodóvar.
A future post-apocalyptic world is ruled by the good-looking people. A terrorist group of disabled people, who see themselves as mutants, take arms against their oppressors. They plan to rid the world of "beautiful people" and superficiality. They are very inept at what they do and mistrust one another. They assassinate body builders, massacre an aerobics class on live TV and blow up a sperm bank as part of their violent campaign.
Led by their chief Ramon Yarritu (Antonio Resines), they plan their final hit before retirement; the kidnap of Patricia Orujo (Frédérique Feder), the daughter and only heiress of billionaire businessman Lord Orujo (Fernando Guillén), the plan involves kidnapping the girl in the middle of her wedding but the scene becomes a massacre when the girl cuts the cake with a large sharp knife puncturing the chest of one of the terrorists that was hidden inside of it, badly hurt he opens the cake top and open fire on the alarmed and unsuspecting attendees, 2 members of the terrorist group are killed in the middle of the fray but the rest manage to flee with Patricia as their hostage. They staple Patricia's lips together with a special electronic device and escape from the police in their spaceship whose disguised as a gigantic fish merchant ship.
Ramon, planning to keep the ransom money for himself, hides from the group that the amount set for the exchange is 100 million and declares its only 10 million, the gang accidentally watches a news flash report where the correct amount to be delivered by the girl's family is revealed, the gang gets upset and summons Ramon to explain the misinformation but he turns the gang members against each other by convincing them there is a traitor on board the ship and that is part of the crew.
His scheme and plot leads to the deaths of all the crewmen/henchmen of the gang seemingly accidentally each time a member was murdered by ramon himself, while killing the last one of the terrorists - Juan (Juan Viadas), who has a siamese twin .. Alex (Álex Angulo), he is discovered and a fierce fight starts culminating in the destruction of the guidance system of the ship. They crash on a planet called Axturiax, a brutal and forgotten mining planet inhabited only by male crazed, sex-starved miners because all women had died. Ramon and Patricia, who has developed Stockholm Syndrome, are captured by miners but manage to escape, but not before they attempt to gang-rape her, Alex survives the crash too and after he friendlies with a blind experienced miner, he decides to pursue Ramon to avenge his death brother and to rescue Patricia, he must drag the attached dead body of his brother Juan around with him for the rest of the film, A planned ransom drop trick by Orujo turns into mayhem, when a portable nuclear device is activated by lord Orujo to wipe clean the whole area, the event is compounded by live TV coverage for the ransom negotiations when Alex arrives and kills Lord Orujo with a headshot, initiating a dogfight inside the bar that goes to its climax when the police forces join the show and Ramon decides to sacrifice himself to allow Patricia escape and survive the bar fight with the police forces outside ... greeting Patricia with a French kiss and Alex by telling him he is still useless, he uses Lord Orujo mini nuke to evaporate the police army outside entrance while the bar trembles and crumbles due to the mini nuke shockwave.
When the nuclear blast is over Alex finally gets rid of his siamese twin attached body and finds Patricia hidden below a metal cage that ironically saved her, they hold each other in order to ready a machine gun and get outside the destroyed bar.
