Jeffrey Dean Morgan (born April 22, 1966) is an American actor. He is best known for playing Denny Duquette in the medical drama Grey's Anatomy for parts of three seasons (2006-2009), John Winchester on Supernatural, The Comedian in the 2009 superhero film Watchmen, and Ike Evans in Magic City. He also played Jason Crouse on the TV series The Good Wife. He made an appearance as Negan in The Walking Dead during the Season 6 finale and will be the primary antagonist in Season 7.
Morgan was born in Seattle, Washington, the son of Sandy Thomas and Richard Dean Morgan. He attended Ben Franklin Elementary School, Rose Hill Junior High, and Lake Washington High School in Kirkland, Washington. He was a basketball player in high school and college.
Starting with Uncaged (1991), Morgan has appeared in over 25 feature films. However, the bulk of his work has been in television. He was the star of the 1996–1997 television series The Burning Zone; his character, Dr. Edward Marcase, appeared in 10 out of 19 episodes that season. In 2005 and 2006, Morgan simultaneously appeared in three television series: in the CW series Supernatural as John Winchester, in a recurring role on ABC's Grey's Anatomy as heart transplant patient Denny Duquette, and as Judah Botwin in two episodes of the Showtime series Weeds. He has also guest-starred in a number of television series, including ER, JAG, Walker, Texas Ranger, Angel, CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, Sliders, The O.C., and Monk.
In 2007, Morgan was cast in a proposed project by Grey's Anatomy creator Shonda Rhimes. The series, tentatively titled "Correspondents", was to have started production in summer 2007. ABC instead picked up a spin-off of Grey's Anatomy, called Private Practice, that was also created by Rhimes. As a result, "Correspondents" was shelved.
Morgan appeared in P.S. I Love You, based on the book of the same title by Irish novelist Cecelia Ahern. He took a crash course on how to play the guitar for his part in the film, and was trained by Nancy Wilson of Heart to The film was released on December 21, 2007. Another 2007 film starring Morgan is The Accidental Husband, which finished filming in New York City in March 2007 and was not released on DVD until 2009.
In 2008, Morgan starred in the thriller The Resident and the drama film Days of Wrath.
In 2009, Morgan portrayed The Comedian, a cigar-chomping antihero, in Watchmen, based on Alan Moore's graphic novel. The same year, Morgan appeared in Taking Woodstock, and played Clay in a comic book movie adaptation of The Losers.
In 2011, Morgan appeared in the Texas crime thriller Texas Killing Fields as a homicide detective.
In 2012, Morgan starred in the television drama series Magic City, which centered on mob life in 1950s Miami. The series premiered on April 6 and was cancelled after two seasons. The same year, Morgan appeared in the horror thriller The Possession, and the war film Red Dawn.
In January 2014, the media announced that Morgan had been cast in the lead role in Jonás Cuarón's Desierto. In November, 2014, it was announced that Morgan had been cast as Joe DiMaggio opposite Kelli Garner as Marilyn Monroe in The Secret Life of Marilyn Monroe, a Lifetime four-hour miniseries based on J. Randy Taraborrelli's book which was filmed in Toronto, Ontario, December 2014-February 2015.
In 2015, Morgan portrayed Deaf Smith in Texas Rising, a five-part mini-series which aired on the History Channel. Also in 2015, he became a regular cast member for season 2 of the CBS sci-fi drama Extant.
He appeared in a brief role in Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice (2016), as Bruce Wayne's father, Thomas Wayne. He also played the character of a freelance investigator Jason Crouse in the popular T.V show The Good Wife. It was confirmed in November 2015 that Morgan will be portraying the character Negan on the AMC TV series The Walking Dead. He made his first appearance as Negan in the sixth season finale and will be the primary antagonist of the seventh season. Morgan's first appearances as Negan received critical acclaim.
On May 30, 1992, Morgan was married to actress Anya Longwell in Las Vegas. In 2007, he was briefly engaged to his former Weeds costar Mary-Louise Parker; their engagement ended in April 2008. In 2009, a former girlfriend, actress Sherrie Rose, alleged that Morgan was her son's father. The boy, named Dean Morgan, was four years old when Morgan supposedly learned about him, according to tabloids. In 2009, Morgan began a relationship with actress Hilarie Burton. The couple's son Augustus was born in March 2010.
