The Witches is a 1990 fantasy film based on the children's novel of the same title by Roald Dahl. It was directed by Nicolas Roeg and produced by The Jim Henson Company for Lorimar Film Entertainment and Warner Bros, starring Anjelica Huston, Mai Zetterling, Rowan Atkinson and Jasen Fisher.
As in the novel, the plot takes place in an alternate reality where the world is plagued by infanticidal witches who masquerade as ordinary women, and the efforts of a boy and his grandmother to destroy them after the boy is turned into a mouse by their newest weapon against human children. The film was very well received by critics but performed poorly at the box office.
During a holiday with his grandmother Helga (Mai Zetterling) in Norway, Luke Eveshim (Jasen Fisher) is told stories about "real" witches, female demons with a genocidal hatred for children, all of whom emit an odor obnoxious to witches. Helga tells him that her childhood friend was taken and cursed to spend the rest of her life trapped inside a painting. After Luke's parents are killed in a car crash, Helga becomes Luke's legal guardian and they move to England. While building a treehouse, Luke is accosted by a witch, though he sees through her ruse and avoids his potential death. On Luke's birthday, Helga falls ill and is diagnosed with diabetes. Her doctor advises them to spend the summer by the sea so Helga can recover.
They stay at a seaside resort, where Luke meets a gluttonous but friendly boy, Bruno Jenkins (Charlie Potter), while getting on the bad side of the hotel manager, Mr. Stringer (Rowan Atkinson), after his pet mice frighten a maid who is having an affair with the manager. Also staying at the hotel are all of England's witches, masquerading as the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children, with the Grand High Witch (Anjelica Huston), the leader of the world's witches, attending their conference. Luke inadvertently discovers the witches while playing with his pet mice inside the ballroom, where the witches hold their meeting. The Grand High Witch unveils her latest weapon: a formula to turn children into mice, which they will use on confectionery products in sweet shops and candy stores to be opened using a hoard of English money provided by the Grand High Witch. Bruno is lured into the room to be given chocolate laced with the formula. He turns into a mouse and flees. Luke attempts to escape but is also captured and turned into a mouse, though he avoids being squashed, finds Bruno and reunites with Helga.
Luke devises a plan to kill the witches by sneaking into the Grand High Witch's room to steal a bottle of the formula. He succeeds, evading the Grand High Witch's cat. Helga attempts to return Bruno to his parents, but they refuse to believe her story. Mrs. Jenkins (Brenda Blethyn) has a fear of mice, causing her to become hysterical on seeing Bruno in mouse form. At the witches' dinner, Luke manages to drop the bottle into a pot of watercress soup, which was on the witches' menu. Mr. Jenkins (Bill Paterson) also orders the soup, though Helga stops him from consuming it at the last minute. The formula turns all of the witches into mice, proving Helga's story about Bruno. The staff and hotel guests join in killing the mice, unknowingly ridding England of its witches, as Helga returns Bruno to his parents. The Grand High Witch is spotted by Helga, who traps her under a water jug, enabling Mr. Stringer to despatch her with a meat cleaver.
Luke and Helga return to their home, where they are delivered the Grand High Witch's trunk full of money and an address book of all witches around the world. Luke (who had secretly readdressed the trunk at the resort) suggests that they might use it to eradicate the world's witches once and for all. That night, the Grand High Witch's assistant Miss Irvine (Jane Horrocks), who had quit her job and escaped the massacre, pays a visit to the house and uses her power to return Luke to human form before leaving to repeat the process with Bruno.
Anjelica Huston as Miss Ernst/Grand High Witch
Jasen Fisher as Lucas "Luke" Eveshim
Mai Zetterling as Helga Eveshim
Rowan Atkinson as Mr. Stringer
Jane Horrocks as Miss Susan Irvine
Charlie Potter as Bruno Jenkins
Anne Lambton as Pamela (The Woman in Black)
Annabel Brooks as Nicola Cuttle
Sukie Smith as Marlene
Bill Paterson as Albert Jenkins
Brenda Blethyn as Rebecca Jenkins
Jenny Runacre as Elizabeth "Elsie"
Emma Relph as Mildred "Millie"
Rose English as Doreen "Dora"
Nora Connolly as Beatrice
Rosamund Greenwood as Janice
Darcy Flynn as Luke's mother
Vincent Marzello as Luke's father
Ola Otnes as Erica's father
Jim Carter as Andre the chef
Roberta Taylor as Jacqueline (chef witch)
Angelique Rockas as Henrietta
Stella Tanner as Loisette "Lois" Leffour
Barbara Hicks as Regina
The following people have done special puppeteer work in this film:
Anthony Asbury
Don Austen – Luke's Mouse Form, Bruno's Mouse Form
Sue Dacre
David Greenaway – Mice
Brian Henson
Robert Tygner – Mice
Steve Whitmire
The Witches based on the book of the same name by British author Roald Dahl. It was the final film that Jim Henson personally worked on before his death, the final theatrical film produced by Lorimar Productions, and the last film made based on Dahl's material before his death (both Henson and Dahl died that year).
The whole section in the start of the film (until they move to the United Kingdom) was shot in Bergen in Norway. Much of the film was shot on location in the Headland Hotel (which was named "Hotel Excelsior" in the film) situated on the coast in Newquay, Cornwall. Roald Dahl originally wanted Cher to play the role of the Grand High Witch, but she was unavailable at the time because the actress was filming Mermaids. Eartha Kitt, Fiona Fullerton, Geneviève Bujold, Starr Andreeff, Olivia Hussey, Sigourney Weaver, Frances Conroy, and Liza Minnelli were all at some point considered for the part of The Grand High Witch prior to Anjelica Huston’s casting. Huston’s casting later satisfied Dahl.
The movie was slated to be distributed by Lorimar but when the company dissolved their theatrical distribution operation, it wound up sitting on the shelf for more than a year after filming was completed. The movie premiered on 25 May 1990, in London and was scheduled to open the same day in the United States, but following Florida test screenings earlier that year Warner Bros. delayed the American release until August. The film took in $10,360,553 in the United States and 266,782 in Germany.
Warner Home Video first released the film on VHS in 1991. The second release (and first re-release) was on VHS and for the first time on DVD in 1999. However, both versions (and any TV screenings) use the original open matte negative of the film, instead of matting it down to 1.85:1 (or 1.66:1). More recently, the film was released in the Netherlands in 2009. This DVD is shown in its theatrical aspect ratio of 1.85:1.
The film contains an orchestral score composed by Stanley Myers. To date, a soundtrack CD has not been released, and the entire score remains obscure. Throughout the score, the Dies Irae appears, highly reminiscent of Berlioz's Symphony Fantastique Mvt. V, "The Witches Sabbath."
The Witches was well received by critics and audiences alike, but performed poorly at the box office. The film holds a rare 100% in the film critics site Rotten Tomatoes, out of 32 reviews. The general consensus is: "With a deliciously wicked performance from Anjelica Huston and imaginative puppetry by Jim Henson's creature shop, Nicolas Roeg's dark and witty movie captures the spirit of Roald Dahl's writing like few other adaptations." Roger Ebert gave the film 3 out of 4 stars, calling the film "an intriguing movie, ambitious and inventive, and almost worth seeing just for Anjelica Huston's obvious delight in playing a completely uncompromised villainess." Roald Dahl himself regarded the film as "utterly appalling" because of the ending that contrasted with the book.
Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films (1991)
Nominated – Saturn Award for Best Actress (Anjelica Huston)
Nominated – Saturn Award for Best Make-up (John Stephenson)
Nominated – Saturn Award for Best Music (Stanley Myers)
Nominated – Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor (Jasen Fisher)
Nominated – Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress (Mai Zetterling)
BAFTA Awards (1991)
Nominated – BAFTA Award for Best Makeup and Hair (Christine Beveridge)
Boston Society of Film Critics Awards (1991)
Won – Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress (Anjelica Huston)
Fantasporto (1991)
Nominated – International Fantasy Film Award for Best Film (Nicolas Roeg)
Hugo Awards (1991)
Nominated – Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards (1990)
Won – Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress (Anjelica Huston)
National Society of Film Critics Awards (1990)
Won – National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actress (Anjelica Huston)
List of films featuring diabetes
