Tatsuya Egawa (江川達也, Egawa Tatsuya, born March 8, 1961) is a Japanese manga artist and film director who was born in Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi Prefecture, Japan.
Egawa has a degree in applied mathematics and taught college mathematics for five months before switching to manga as a career in 1984. He studied under the prolific manga artist Hiroshi Motomiya for four months. Tatsuya's break came when his story "Don't Give Up" won Comic Morning's open contest. He is probably best known for his Golden Boy manga series which debuted in 1992.
He has also written and directed live-action pornographic films. In 2003 he started an association with the Japanese adult video (AV) studio Soft On Demand (SOD) under its president Ganari Takahashi. His first video with the company, My Yearning Female Private Teacher (憧れの家庭教師, Akogare no katei kyōshi), was released August 8, 2003 as SOD production SDDM-311, and marked the AV debut of actress Reika Yoshizawa. His second work for SOD, My Yearning Office Lady (憧れのオフィスレディ, Akogare no ofisu redi) (SDDM-336), starring Ai Kurosawa, came out in October 2003. A third video, released in February 2004, My Yearning Combatant (憧れの戦闘員, Akogare no sentō in) (SDDM-404), with actress Shizuku Tsukino, contained some bondage elements.
In 2006, Egawa directed his first live-action film, Tokyo University Story, based on his manga of the same name. The film, produced by SOD, was released theatrically in Japan in February 2006. Four years later, he directed his second theatrical feature, King Game (KING GAME キングゲーム, Kingu gemu) about a group of ten people mysteriously trapped in a room to play the "King Game", a Japanese version of "Truth or Dare". The film, from an original story by Egawa, made its debut in Tokyo's Shinjuku district at K’s Cinema on August 28, 2010. One of the actresses in the film is Nana Natsume, a former AV actress who began working for SOD in late 2003.
Tatsuya is known for his drawings of over-the-top facial expressions always crediting the staff of his creations, even on the covers (crediting the works to "Egawa and his assistants"). Kōsuke Fujishima, who is known as the creator of Oh My Goddess was once one of Egawa's assistants.
Be Free
Dead Man (manga)
ONE-ZERO-NINE
The Last Man
Take-chan and Papa
Golden Boy
Happy Boy
Magical Taluluto
Tokyo Daigaku Monogatari
Russo-Japanese War Story
Genji Monogatari
Golden Boy 2
Akogare no katei kyōshi, 2003 (adult video)
Akogare no ofisu redi, 2003 (adult video)
Akogare no sentō in, 2004 (adult video)
Tokyo University Story, 2006
King Game (KING GAME キングゲーム), 2010
