Allie Haze (born May 10, 1987) is an American pornographic actress.
Haze was raised in Redlands, California. She is of Dutch and Hispanic descent. As a child, she modeled, competed in beauty pageants, and performed in theatre. She trained as a veterinary technician and firefighter prior to her porn career.
Haze entered the adult film industry in June 2009, although her first scene wasn't released until September of that year. She only worked in girl/girl scenes during the first six months of her career. Her first boy/girl scene was with Ramón Nomar for Reality Kings. She initially planned to become a webcam model when someone suggested she use a stage name that would appear at the top of website listings, which are in alphabetical order. She chose "Allie" because her favorite soccer team as a child was the Albany Alleycats. "Haze" is a variation of her former fiance's last name, Hayes.
Even though Haze was 22 years old when she made her porn debut, she is often cast in the teen pornography genre due to her youthful appearance.
In May 2011, Haze signed as exclusive contract performer with Vivid Entertainment. She made her debut with Vivid in November, with the movie Allie Haze: True Sex. She left Vivid in May 2012. She was represented by LA Direct Models until June 1, 2015, when her contract with the agency expired and she began representing herself.
It was announced at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival that Haze would be the next Emmanuelle, performing under the alias Brittany Joy. In 2012, she portrayed Princess Leia in the film Star Wars XXX: A Porn Parody.
Haze was the Penthouse Pet of the Month for January 2014.
Haze was one of the sixteen pornographic actresses featured in Deborah Anderson's 2013 feature-length documentary film Aroused.
Haze was placed on CNBC's yearly list "The Dirty Dozen: Porn's Most Popular Stars" in 2012 and 2013.
In 2014, Haze appeared in the music video for the song "John Doe" by B.o.B ft. Priscilla Renea and the Syfy film Age of Ice.
In 2015, Haze appeared in a BuzzFeed video featuring relationship advice from porn stars.
Haze married a preacher at 18 and divorced at 20. She identifies as bisexual. She states that she decided to work in porn because she "wanted a safe, fun way to hit on girls without having to go to a bar every night and buy drinks and dinners". She currently resides in Las Vegas.
