The Savages is a 2007 American drama film written and directed by Tamara Jenkins. It stars Laura Linney and Philip Seymour Hoffman. Alexander Payne and Jenkins' husband Jim Taylor were two of the executive producers. The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival to critical acclaim.
After drifting apart emotionally over the years, two single siblings — Wendy (Linney) and Jon (Hoffman) — band together to care for their estranged, elderly father, Lenny (Philip Bosco), who is rapidly slipping into dementia. Wendy and Jon first travel to Sun City, Arizona to attend the funeral of their father's girlfriend of 20 years. When they arrive, they are told that their father signed a non-marriage agreement and will not have rights to any of her property. They then move him to a nursing home in Buffalo, where Jon is a theater professor working on a book about Bertolt Brecht. Wendy, who is an aspiring, but unsuccessful, playwright, moves from New York City to help establish their father in Buffalo.
Neither of the siblings are close with Lenny. It is implied that he was a physically and emotionally abusive father when Jon and Wendy were growing up and they cut him out of their lives. They were also abandoned by their mother at a young age. Their dysfunctional family life appears to have left Wendy and Jon emotionally crippled and unable to sustain a relationship. She is sleeping with an unattainable married man 13 years her senior and he cannot commit to a Polish woman who must return to Kraków after her visa expires.
Their visits to the nursing home and their father's eventual death allow them to reevaluate their lives and to grow emotionally. In the end, Wendy has broken up with her married lover, but has adopted his dog, which he had planned to put down. She is also seen working on the production of her play about their terrible childhood, while Jon is leaving for a conference in Poland where it is suggested he may reconnect with the woman he had let go. The film closes with Wendy running with her lover's dog alive, running with the aid of a wheeled hip cast, suggesting a mode of flawed yet persevering life for both siblings.
Laura Linney as Wendy Savage
Philip Seymour Hoffman as Jon Savage
Philip Bosco as Lenny Savage
Peter Friedman as Larry
Guy Boyd as Bill Lachman
Debra Monk as Nancy Lachman
Margo Martindale as Roz
Rosemary Murphy as Doris Metzger
David Zayas as Eduardo
Gbenga Akinnagbe as Jimmy
Tonye Patano as Mrs. Robinson
Cara Seymour as Kasia
Kristine Nielsen as Nurse
The film received very favorable reviews from critics. As of October 14, 2012, the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 89% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 113 reviews. Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 85 out of 100, based on 35 reviews.
Time magazine's Richard Schickel named the film #7 of his Top 10 Movies of 2007, and praises both the cast and writer-director:
These actors are unimprovable as, somehow, they find a certain decency under the pressure of their grinding familial chore, a reason to hope that slightly better days may be ahead for them once their duty has been done. Writer-director Tamara Jenkins is less interested in heroically inspiring us than she is in showing us the values to be found in the more modest forms of dutifulness.
The film appeared on many critics' top 10 lists of the best films of 2007.
1st - Carina Chocano, Los Angeles Times (tied with The Diving Bell and the Butterfly)
3rd - Ella Taylor, LA Weekly (tied with Away from Her)
3rd - Sheri Linden, The Hollywood Reporter
5th - David Edelstein, New York magazine
5th - Marjorie Baumgarten, The Austin Chronicle
6th - Lawrence Toppman, The Charlotte Observer
7th - Kirk Honeycutt, The Hollywood Reporter
7th - Peter Hartlaub, San Francisco Chronicle
7th - Richard Schickel, TIME magazine
8th - Frank Scheck, The Hollywood Reporter
8th - Nathan Rabin, The A.V. Club
8th - Ray Bennett, The Hollywood Reporter
9th - A. O. Scott, The New York Times (tied with Away from Her)
10th - Carrie Rickey, The Philadelphia Inquirer
10th - Manohla Dargis, The New York Times (7-way tie)
80th Academy Awards
Academy Award for Best Actress (Laura Linney)
Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay (Tamara Jenkins)
Central Ohio Film Critics Association Awards
Actor of the Year (Philip Seymour Hoffman) -- WON (Also for: Before the Devil Knows You're Dead and Charlie Wilson's War)
Chicago Film Critics Association Awards
Best Actress (Laura Linney)
Best Screenplay, Original (Tamara Jenkins)
65th Golden Globe Awards
Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture - Musical or Comedy (Philip Seymour Hoffman)
Gotham Awards
Best Ensemble Cast (Philip Bosco, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Laura Linney)
Independent Spirit Awards
Best Cinematography (W. Mott Hupfel III)
Best Director (Tamara Jenkins)
Best Male Lead (Philip Seymour Hoffman) -- WON
Best Screenplay (Tamara Jenkins) -- WON
London Critics Circle Film Awards
Actress of the Year (Laura Linney)
Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards
Best Screenplay (Tamara Jenkins) -- WON
National Society of Film Critics Awards
Best Screenplay (Tamara Jenkins) -- WON
Nilsson Awards for Film
Best Picture
Best Actor in a Leading Role (Philip Seymour Hoffman)
Best Actress in a Leading Role (Laura Linney)
Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Philip Bosco)
Best Original Screenplay (Tamara Jenkins)
Best Cast
Best Original Score
Online Film Critics Society Awards
Best Actress (Laura Linney)
San Francisco Film Critics Circle Awards
Best Screenplay - Original (Tamara Jenkins) -- WON
Satellite Awards
Best Actress in a Motion Picture, Drama (Laura Linney)
Women Film Critics Circle Awards
Best Actress (Laura Linney) -- WON
Writers Guild of America Awards
Best Original Screenplay (Tamara Jenkins)
