Zhou Xun (born October 18, 1974) is a Chinese actress and singer who has won "Best Actress" at the Hong Kong Film Awards, Golden Bauhinia Awards, Hong Kong Film Critics Society Awards, Golden Horse Awards, Golden Rooster Awards, Hundred Flowers Awards, Festival du Film de Paris, Shanghai Film Critics Awards, Beijing College Student Film Festival and Asian Film Awards, among others. She is regarded as one of the "Four Dan Actresses" of China.
Zhou was born to a middle-class family in Quzhou, Zhejiang. Her father, Zhou Tianning (周天宁), was a local film projectionist, and her mother, Chen Yiqin (陈以琴), was a salesperson at a department store. She had her schooling in Quzhou No.1 Middle School. After she graduated,Zhou enrolled at the Zhejiang Arts Institute to further her interest in dramatic arts, against the wishes of her parents, who wanted her to graduate from a university. She was handpicked for a role in the film Strange Tales Amongst Old and Desolate Tombs during her teenage years in school.
Zhou gained international recognition for her roles in Lou Ye's Suzhou River (2000) and Dai Sijie's Balzac and the Little Chinese Seamstress (2002), winning the Best Actress Award for the former at the 15th Festival du Film de Paris. In 2002, she starred as Huang Rong, reuniting her with Kaixin Jiuhao television co-star Li Yapeng, who played Guo Jing, in the 2003 television series The Legend of the Condor Heroes. The series was one of the most watched ones in mainland China in that year.
Zhou entered the Hong Kong film industry in 2005, starring in Peter Chan's musical film Perhaps Love. She won the "Best Actress" award at the Hong Kong Film Awards, Hong Kong Film Critic's Society Awards, Golden Bauhinia Awards, Golden Horse Awards, Beijing Student Film Festival and Hangzhou Student Film Festival for her performance. After Perhaps Love, her next film was Feng Xiaogang's The Banquet, in which she played a supporting role. Zhou's next project was Susie Au's film Ming Ming (2007), which won high praise at the 2006 Pusan International Film Festival held in South Korea. At the premiere of the film, she released her new music video, featuring the theme song of Ming Ming.
In 2008, Zhou starred in Cao Baoping's romantic thriller The Equation of Love and Death as a taxicab driver on the lookout for her missing boyfriend. The movie was filmed in Yunnan. In that year, she also played the lead role in Painted Skin, a remake of a classic supernatural thriller of the same title. She has also appeared in the urban romantic comedy All About Women directed by Tsui Hark.
In 2012, Zhou made her Hollywood debut in Cloud Atlas, in multiple roles in the film, as Yoona~939, a clone in dystopian 2144 Korea; as Rose, in 2321; and as Talbot / Hotel Manager in 1973.
Apart from her acting career, Zhou has also performed for some motion picture soundtracks, such as Ming Ming, Baobei In Love, Xin Bian Guo Le Xi San Meng You Xian Jing and Perhaps Love. She has also released two solo albums, Summer (2003) and Come Across (2005).
Zhou Xun is the 2010 Laureate of United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)'s Champions of the Earth (Inspiration & Action). She was the first entertainer in the world to receive this honour.
Zhou Xun and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) jointly runs a campaign 'Our Part', which promotes ‘tips for green living’.
She was named a UNDP Goodwill Ambassador for China in 2008 with a special focus of promoting environmental sustainability.
She was also the Green Ambassador for the 2010 World Expo in Shanghai.
Since 2011, Zhou was formally announced as a new ambassador for Chanel. Chanel chief designer Karl Lagerfeld noted Zhou Xun for her strong fashion sense, describing the actress as "a synthesis of young Coco Chanel and Ballet Troupe Zizi Jeanmaire."
Zhou Xun married American actor Archie Kao on July 16, 2014 on stage after a charity event in Hangzhou, China.
