Bread and Tulips or Pane e tulipani is a 2000 romance comedy film directed by Italian Director Silvio Soldini. The movie stars Licia Maglietta and Bruno Ganz as Rosalba Barletta and Fernando Girasole. The film was an official selection at numerous film festivals, including the Cannes Film Festival and the Toronto International Film Festival.
An Italian housewife of Abruzzo, Rosalba Barletta (Maglietta), finds herself stranded during a family vacation. Instead of waiting for her controlling businessman husband, she hitchhikes her way home, only to impulsively detour to Venice. She finds accommodations with a restaurant maître d', Fernando Girasole (Ganz), and soon finds herself enjoying her new life. Meanwhile, her husband has sent a bumbling plumber who has come for the interview to his company, Costantino (Battiston), as a private detective to find her. After meeting and falling in love with Grazia, Rosalba's neighbor across the hall, Costantino calls Rosalba's husband and quits his detective job, claiming that he is unable to find her. However, her husband's mistress Ketty appears and convinces Rosalba to return to her home in Pescara, as Rosalba's son has taken to drugs during her absence. Considering the vitality of her return to her duties, she abandons her Venice life and returns home to her family. Fernando follows her and persuades her to return to Venice with him. Rosalba realizes her love for Fernando and returns with him to Venice. The movie ends with all the characters dancing gaily for a surreal music in the stunning moonlight.
Licia Maglietta - Rosalba Barletta
Bruno Ganz - Fernando Girasole
Giuseppe Battiston - Costantino Caponangeli
Antonio Catania - Mimmo Barletta
Marina Massironi - Grazia
Felice Andreasi - Fermo
Vitalba Andrea - Ketty
Tatiana Lepore - Adele
Daniela Piperno - Woman in car
Tiziano Cucchiarelli - Nic
"Moro" by Lars Hollmer
"Franska Valsen" by Lars Hollmer
Theme from "La Gazza Ladra" by Gioachino Rossini
"Il Valzer di Vera Zasulich" by Giovanni Venosta
"Disco Man" by Ranee Lee, Alain Leroux, Jacques Lafleche, sung by Ranee Lee
"Eclisse Twist" by Michelangelo Antonioni, performed by Tuscolano Brothers
"Frasi d'amori" by Aldo Caponi and Detto Mariano, sung by Don Backy
"Tu Solamente Tu" (1939) by Pasquale Frustaci and Michele Galdieri, sung by Tiola Silenzi
"Rosa y Clavel" by B. Valli and Giovanni Venosta, sung by Lorenzo Castelluccio accompanied by Rhapsodija Trio
The film was released on July 27, 2001 and grossed $32,933 in the opening weekend. It went on to gross $5,318,679 in the American market and $3,159,755 from the overseas market for a worldwide total of $8,478,434.
5 Nastro d'Argento: Best Actress, Best Director, Best Screenplay, Best Supporting Actor and Best Supporting Actress.
9 David di Donatello: Best Film, Best Director, Best Actress, Best Actor, Best Cinematography, Best Screenplay, Best sound, Best supporting actor (Giuseppe Battiston) and Best supporting actress (Marina Massironi ).
