So Little Time is an American sitcom starring Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen in their second television series since the short-lived Two of a Kind ended in 1999. It aired on Fox Family: the first half of the series aired from June 2, 2001, to August 15, 2001, and the series then went on a four-month hiatus owing to network management changes. By December 2001, Fox Family had become ABC Family, and the remaining episodes aired until May 4, 2002. "So Little Time" now reruns on Nickelodeon.
Mary-Kate Olsen as Riley Carlson
Ashley Olsen as Chloe Carlson
Clare Carey as Macy Carlson
Eric Lutes as Jake Carlson
Jesse Head as Larry Slotnick
Taylor Negron as Manuelo Del Valle
Natashia Williams as Tedi
Amy Davidson as Cammie Morton
Wendy Worthington as Ellen Westmore
Ben Easter as Lennon Kincaid
The Canadian Family Channel aired reruns of the series weekdays at 6:00pm until June 28, 2007, when they were replaced by Zoey 101. In the United Kingdom, the show aired on BBC One and on the Children's Channel CBBC. Some episodes had a shorter running time than others because of the removal of the "behind the scenes" featurettes.
Later in the series, the show starts with the crew wandering around the set with the camera following them. They talk about today's events, such as the birthday of an actor on the set. Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen usually appear in this segment.
A short "behind the scenes" featurette was sometimes included at the end of an episode as well. Although retained on the Warner Home Video VHS and DVD releases, these were always edited out of the U.K. terrestrial transmissions.
There are 4 volumes of So Little Time available on DVD and VHS. Each DVD/VHS includes 6 episodes. The complete series boxset is also available on DVD, which includes all 26 episodes.
So Little Time: School's Cool (August 13, 2002)
So Little Time: Boy Crazy (August 13, 2002)
So Little Time: About A Family (August 13, 2002)
So Little Time: Hangin Out (June 3, 2003)
So Little Time: The Complete Series (September 6, 2005)
Several episodes of So Little Time were novelized and published in book form by HarperCollins Entertainment. The series also featured new original stories based on the show, which were written by the same authors. As of the spring of 2008, 17 So Little Time books have been released, following the lives of Chloe and Riley.
How to Train a Boy
Instant Boyfriend
Too Good To Be True
Just Between Us
Tell Me About It
Secret Crush
Girl Talk
The Love Factor
Dating Game
A Girl's Guide to Guys
Boy Crazy
Best Friends Forever
Love is in the Air
Spring Breakup
Get Real
Surf Holiday
The Makeover Experiment
A soundtrack album featuring the show's theme song as well as other music featured in the series was released by Trauma Records and Dualstar Records in June 2001, and was made available on iTunes, Amazon MP3 and Spotify on June 5, 2010 by Kirtland Records.
Arkarna - "So Little Time"
Noogie - "Mr. Fabulous"
Jason Feddy - "The Beautiful Few"
Joey Kingpin - "Rock It"
Vienna - "Where I Wanna Be"
Ritalin - "Stuck Like Glue"
George Tenen III and James Pennington - "You Make Me Love You More"
Lovepie - "Thoughts of You"
The Getaway People - "Superstar"
Chad Hollister - "Leavin' Home"
Crashpalace - "Brickwall"
The Weekend - "Punk Rock Show"
