Nicola Anne Peltz (born January 9, 1995) is an American actress. Her breakthrough role came when she played Katara in the 2010 film The Last Airbender. Since then, she has played Bradley Martin in the A&E series Bates Motel, and starred as Tessa Yeager in the fourth Transformers film, Transformers: Age of Extinction (2014).
Peltz was born in Westchester County, New York. Her mother, Claudia (née Heffner), is a former model, and her father, Nelson Peltz, is a billionaire businessman. She has four older brothers, two younger brothers, and an older sister; two of her brothers are actor Will Peltz and ice hockey defenceman Brad Peltz. She also has two half-siblings from her father's previous marriages. Her father is of Austrian Jewish and Russian Jewish descent, while her mother has German, Welsh, and English ancestry. The New York Times has described Nicola's parents as "compassionate leaders of the New York Jewish community".
When Peltz was 12, she acquired an agent, and by the age of 13, she was starring in a Manhattan Theatre Club production of Blackbird, alongside Jeff Daniels.
Peltz made her film debut in the 2006 film Deck the Halls, playing Mackenzie. She later appeared in the film Harold (2008), where she was cast as Becki, and Righteous Kill (2008), portraying the role of Lynn. Also in 2008, Peltz starred in the music video for Miley Cyrus' single "7 Things". In 2010, she played Katara in the fantasy adventure film The Last Airbender, which was directed by M. Night Shyamalan. Peltz appeared at the 2010 MTV Movie Awards with co-star Jackson Rathbone to present a trailer for the film.
From 2013 to 2015, Peltz was part of the main cast of the A&E drama-thriller series Bates Motel, playing Bradley Martin, a love interest for the young Norman Bates. She co-starred with Freddie Highmore and Vera Farmiga, appearing in 14 episodes total. On March 26, 2013, Peltz was cast as one of the lead characters, Tessa Yeager, in the fourth Transformers film Transformers: Age of Extinction, which was released in June 2014.
In 2014, Peltz starred as Kate Miller, opposite Ben Rosenfield and Grant Gustin, in the teen drama film Affluenza. In July 2015, she joined the cast of the dark comedy film Youth in Oregon, playing Annie Gleason, the daughter of Billy Crudup and Christina Applegate's characters. In October 2015, she walked the runway for Alexander Wang's last fashion show for Balenciaga at Paris Fashion Week.
Peltz appeared in the music video for Zayn Malik's single "It's You", from his debut solo album, in February 2016. In April 2016, she joined the Hulu drama pilot When the Street Lights Go On, based on a Black List script of the same name. Peltz is set to star alongside Thomas Mann in the sci-fi film Our House, directed by Anthony Scott Burns.
