Men in Black: The Series, also known as MIB: The Series, MIB: The Animated Series, and Men in Black: The Animated Series, is an American animated television series that originally aired on The WB's Kids' WB programming block from October 11, 1997 to June 30, 2001 The show features characters from 1997's science fiction film Men in Black, which was based on the comic book series The Men in Black by Lowell Cunningham, originally published by Marvel / Malibu Comics. The series was produced by Adelaide Productions Inc., a division of Columbia TriStar Television, and Amblin Television as a half-hour series originally airing on Saturday mornings, and later moving to weekdays during the final run. It was a more detailed TV series of the movie saga.
Agent K: Ed O'Ross (Season 1), Gregg Berger (Season 2–4)
Agent J: Keith Diamond
Agent L: Jennifer Lien (Season 1–3), Jennifer Martin (Season 4)
Zed: Charles Napier
Frank the Pug: Eddie Barth
Jack Jeebs: Tony Shalhoub (first few episodes), Billy West (onwards)
The Worm Guys: Patrick Pinney and Pat Fraley as two worms each
The Twins: Pat Pinney as Idikiukup and Pat Fraley as Bob
Alpha: David Warner
Aileen: Beth Broderick
Buzzard: Sherman Howard
Troy the Symbiote: Rino Romano
Edgar Bug/Edwin Bug/Queen Of The Bugs/Bug Aliens: Vincent D'Onofrio
Dr. Zeeltor: Steve Kehela
Agent X: Adam Baldwin
In the United States, six episodes from the first half of the first season were issued on three two-episode VHS volumes, all made available on March 16, 1999. The United Kingdom received a similar release on August 19, 2002, however, all six episodes were released on one bumper VHS instead of three two-episode volumes. The release also included a bonus seventh episode, which was actually episode one, billed as the "pilot episode". It was then announced that the remainder of the show's first season, episodes 8-13, would be exclusively released in the region, being made available on VHS on January 24, 2003. On July 12, 2004, the first three episodes of the first season were issued on DVD for the first time by UCA Pictures. Further releases were planned, but sales were not strong enough to warrant any other DVD releases from UCA. The entire first season was issued on DVD for the first time on July 4, 2007 in Australia, via Sony Pictures Entertainment. The set contained two discs, one containing seven episodes and the other containing the remaining six. On July 16, 2007, the set was made available in the United Kingdom, however, was this time split up into two separate volumes instead of a whole box set. On May 11, 2012, the entire first season was released on DVD for the first time in the United States, being made available as an exclusive product for Target stores in the country. Thus far, no plans have been announced to issue any further seasons of the show on DVD.
Daytime Emmy Awards
2002 – Outstanding Sound Editing - Special Class - Roshaun Hawley, Paca Thomas, Dan Cubert and Marc S. Perlman (won)
