The 16th Academy Awards, in 1944, was the first Oscar ceremony held at a large public venue, Grauman’s Chinese Theater. Free passes were given out to men and women in uniform. Originating on KFWB, the complete ceremony was internationally broadcast by CBS Radio via shortwave. Jack Benny served as master of ceremonies for the event, which lasted fewer than 30 minutes.
The serial cartoon Tom and Jerry won its first Oscar this year for The Yankee Doodle Mouse after two failed nominations in a row. It would go on to win another six Oscars, including three in a row for the next three years, and gained a total of 13 nominations.
For the first time, supporting actors and actresses took home full-size statuettes, instead of smaller-sized awards mounted on a plaque.
For Whom the Bell Tolls was the third film to receive nominations in all four acting categories.
This was the last year until 2009 to have 10 nominations for Best Picture; The Ox-Bow Incident is, as of 2015, the last film to be nominated solely in that category.
Winners are listed first and highlighted in boldface.
George Pal
Hal B. Wallis
Donald Crisp (Presenter: Best Supporting Actor)
Howard Estabrook (Presenter: Documentary Awards)
Sidney Franklin (Presenter: Best Picture)
Y. Frank Freeman (Presenter: Best Film Editing, Best Sound Recording, Best Special Effects, and Scientific & Technical Awards)
Greer Garson (Presenter: Best Actress)
James Hilton (Presenter: Writing Awards)
Carole Landis (Presenter: Best Art Direction)
George Murphy (Presenter: Best Actor)
Rosalind Russell (Presenter: Best Cinematography)
Mark Sandrich (Presenter: Best Director)
Dinah Shore (Presenter: Music Awards)
Walter Wanger (Presenter: Short Subject Awards and Honorary Award)
Teresa Wright (Presenter: Best Supporting Actress)
Darryl F. Zanuck (Presenter: Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award)
Edgar Bergen & Charlie McCarthy
Ray Bolger
Susanna Foster
Mitzi Gerber
Lena Horne
Betty Hutton
Kay Kyser & His Band
Red Skelton
1st Golden Globe Awards
1943 in film
