Robots is a 2005 American computer-animated science fiction dystopian comedy film, produced by Blue Sky Studios for 20th Century Fox and was released on March 11, 2005. The story was created by Chris Wedge and William Joyce. Originally developing a film version of Joyce's book Santa Calls, Wedge and Joyce then decided to develop an original story about a world of robots. Joyce served as producer and production designer for the film. It features the voices of Ewan McGregor, Halle Berry, Jim Broadbent, Greg Kinnear, Mel Brooks, Amanda Bynes, Drew Carey, and Robin Williams. The film earned $260.7 million on a $75 million budget.
In Rivet Town, Herb Copperbottom, a dishwasher at Gunk's Greasy Spoon diner, races through the streets, elated that he is going to be a father. He and his wife Lydia after 12 hours of "labor", construct the baby. He is named Rodney, and he becomes a young inventor who dreams of making the world a better place. Rodney idolizes Bigweld, a master inventor and owner of Bigweld Industries. During Rodney's adolescence, he invents a gadget called the Wonderbot, intended to help his father clean the dishes at the restaurant. When Herb's supervisor unexpectedly confronts them, Wonderbot breaks dishes, causing Herb to be put in debt and Rodney to be dismissed. Rodney takes his invention to Robot City to see Bigweld and get a job as an inventor at Bigweld Industries, so that he can help his father pay back his supervisor. His father encourages him and confides that he has always regretted not pursuing his dream of becoming a musician. Rodney arrives in Robot City and meets Fender, a ramshackle robot who takes souvenir photos and sells maps to the stars' homes. After a spectacular, but harrowing, ride on the crosstown express, Rodney arrives at the gate of Bigweld Industries.
However, he learns that Phineas T. Ratchet has taken over Bigweld Industries and is about to discontinue the manufacture of spare parts. Ratchet believes the company can make a bigger profit if it focuses on selling expensive upgrades; if the robots refuse, they are sent to the underground Chop Shop, where they are shredded and melted down by Ratchet's mother, leader, and boss Madame Gasket. Rodney is forced out and shares quarters with Fender at Aunt Fanny's low-rent boarding house, along with an assortment of other "Rusties" — four other outmoded robots threatened with the Chop Shop (one of whom is Fender's younger sister Piper, who develops a crush on Rodney). When the news gets out that spare parts have been discontinued by Bigweld industries, Rodney remembers Bigweld's slogan "See a need, fill a need" and begins fixing old robots on his own, who greatly thank him as a lifesaver. Upon discovering this, Gasket immediately orders Ratchet to stop Rodney and kill Bigweld.
Rodney discovers Herb needs replacement parts. Rodney decides to contact Bigweld directly to beg him to restart the manufacture of spare parts. Wonderbot reminds him the annual Bigweld Ball takes place that night. Rodney and Fender go to the ball in disguise, only to hear Ratchet announce that Bigweld was unable to attend. Rodney confronts Ratchet, but security robots stop him. Cappy, a robot-executive who dislikes Madame Gasket's plan, saves him, and together with Fender and his new girlfriend Loretta Geargrinder, they escape from the ball.
Fender walks Loretta home, but he is taken to the Chop Shop by Madame Gasket. While escaping, he loses the lower half of his body and reluctantly attaches a new pair of female legs. Meanwhile, Rodney and Cappy fly to Bigweld's home. When Rodney inadvertently knocks over a domino, Bigweld appears. Rodney asks Bigweld to return to the helm of his company and once again make spare parts available, but Bigweld refuses. Rodney calls his parents, intending to give up his ambition of becoming an inventor and return to Rivet Town, but his father once again encourages Rodney to pursue his dreams. Rodney rallies the Rusties into fighting back against Madame Gasket. Fender reveals that, under Gasket's orders, Ratchet has built a fleet of super-sweepers with the intention of rounding up and destroying all older robots. Bigweld eventually comes with the group, having realized what Rodney meant to him. The gang prepare to defeat Madame Gasket.
At Bigweld Industries, Bigweld dismisses Ratchet, but Ratchet hits him over the head with a phone. This sends Bigweld insane and eventually leads into a chase. Bigweld is repaired just as they enter the Chop Shop, but is captured by Madame Gasket. A desperate battle ensues between Gasket's henchmen and Rodney's repaired robots. During the chaos, Rodney rescues Bigweld, the choppers and sweepers are destroyed, Wonderbot kills Gasket by tossing her into the furnace and Ratchet loses his upgrades. Bigweld goes to Rivet Town to tell Rodney's parents that their son is now his right-hand inventor and eventual successor. Rodney makes his father's dream come true by giving him a three-bell trumpet and the audience dances to James Brown's "Get Up Offa That Thing" as a victory celebration.
Movie director Chris Wedge says New York City, Toronto and London, inspired him to make the city. There are three parts of the city: High End District: The part of the city where the rich and famous robots live. Buildings and robots are all shiny and nearly everything is futuristic. Everyone here has a metal covering that hides all their inner workings. Bigweld Industries is here. Combustion District: Low-class place. It has numerous rust spots, and robots have the internal workings similar to a 1950s car at best. Aunt Fanny's house is here, and the majority of the movie takes place here. Steam District: The lowest part of the city, and therefore the rustiest. Parts of the district resemble the inventions of the Industrial Revolution, and everywhere is filled with broken machines. Sweepers grab old robots and bring them to Madame Gasket's Chop Shop, where mutant robots then break and melt robots, turning them into upgrades. Another major location of the film is Rivet Town, home to the Copperbottom family. Two of the buildings there are Gunk's Greasy Spoon and Flathead Floyd's. Rivet Town is based on Watertown, New York, where movie director Chris Wedge lived during his teens.
Robots premiered on March 6, 2005 in Westwood, Los Angeles, and it was released theatrically on March 11, 2005. The film was the first to feature the new trailer for Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith. The film also featured the exclusive trailer for Ice Age: The Meltdown, then called Ice Age 2. Robots was digitally re-mastered into IMAX format (IMAX DMR) and released in select IMAX theatres around the world. It was the first Twentieth Century Fox's film that was released on the same day on IMAX and conventional 35mm screens. It was also the first IMAX DMR film released in the Spring season, and the second IMAX DMR film distributed by Fox.
The DVD and VHS of Robots were released on September 27, 2005. The film was accompanied by an original short animated film based on Robots, titled Aunt Fanny's Tour of Booty. On March 22, 2011, it was released in high-definition on Blu-ray disc.
On the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film has a rating of 64% based on 177 reviews. The site's consensus reads: "Robots delights on a visual level, but the story feels like it came off an assembly line." Another review aggregator, Metacritic, gave a score of 64 based on 33 reviews. Roger Ebert gave the film three and a half stars out of four, stating that "this is a movie that is a joy to behold entirely apart from what it is about. It looks happy, and, more to the point, it looks harmonious."
The film was released March 11, 2005 in the United States and Canada and grossed $36 million in 3,776 theaters its opening weekend, ranking #1 at the box office. It grossed a total of $260.7 million worldwide – $128.2 million in the United States and Canada and $132.5 million in other territories.
The film was nominated for many awards in the category of best animated film, as well as awards for character design, best animated character, voice casting, and sound editing. However, it only won one, the MTV (Mexico) Movie Award for best song, "Un Héroe Real".
Robots: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on March 1, 2005 by Virgin Records.
Other songs in the film include
"Underground" - Tom Waits
"Can't Get Enough of Your Love, Babe" - Barry White
"...Baby One More Time" - Britney Spears
"See Me" - Melanie Blatt
"Eye of the Tiger" - Survivor
"From Zero to Hero" - Sarah Connor
"Gonna Make You Sweat (Everybody Dance Now)" - C+C Music Factory and Freedom Williams
Robots: Original Motion Picture Score was composed by John Powell and was released on March 15, 2005 by Varèse Sarabande Records.
