Dragon Hunters is a French 52-episode 24-minute animated fantasy comedy television series created by Arthur Qwak and produced by the French company Futurikon. It follows the adventures of two hunters for hire through a medieval world of floating land masses that is terrorized by a widely varying menace of monsters known collectively as dragons. A 3-D feature film and a videogame based on the film have also been released. The original French title is Chasseurs de Dragons.
Gwizdo is the brains of the group, and negotiates their contracts with the helpless people terrorized by dragons. He has a gap in his teeth. He speaks with a New York or New Jersey accent. He and Lian-Chu have known each other since childhood, and were raised together in an orphanage called Mother Hubbard's Farm. He is a coward and swindler at heart, but shows his good side occasionally. He is the one who can read, write and count at the inn, therefore depend on it for business and contracts. He also flies their airship, the St. George, and wears a pilot's cap and goggles. English voice: Rick Jones (series), Rob Paulsen (movie)
Lian-Chu is a sword-wielding, muscle-bound warrior who actually deals out the dragon slaying. In contrast to Gwizdo, he is more kindhearted and honorable. He is also an avid knitter. In the episode "Farewell Lian Chu", it is revealed that his parents were killed by a dragon because his uncle did not give notice to the people when the dragon was on his way to the village. He only knows how to count to 10 and can not read and thus depends on Gwizdo for this. English voice: Harry Standjofski (series), Forest Whitaker (movie)
Hector is their pet dragon who does not possess the evil nature or the great size of the ones they hunt and acts like a dog. With his fur and ears he seems to be based on a variation of Asian dragon (similar to Falkor the Luck Dragon in The Neverending Story). His hobbies are eating and picking on other animals such as chickens or sheep. While Gwizdo is the pilot of the St. George, Hector is required to pedal for the propeller, a task he is not fond of. He speaks with a mixture of grunts and pidgin English. English voice: Rick Jones (series), Dave Wittenberg (movie)
Jennyline runs the Snoring Dragon Inn, where Gwizdo and Lian-Chu live. Gwizdo and Lian-Chu owe her an ever-growing debt for room and board. She is a heavyset woman who is short-tempered and strict. She has had three past marriages, which have resulted in Zaza, Zoria and possibly other children. Her name is given as Jennyline on the DVDs and Janelynn on the official website. The German variation of her name is Jeanneline. English voice: Sonja Ball
Zaza is Jennyline's youngest daughter. She resides at the Snoring Dragon Inn as an assistant. She idolizes Lian-Chu and has dreams of becoming a dragon hunter when she grows up, of which Jennyline disapproves. She spends most of her time at the inn, but occasionally joins the hunters on quests, often through her own means. English voice: Annie Bovaird
Zoe is Jennyline's oldest daughter, and is an accomplished dragon hunter in her own right. Like Zaza, she was inspired by Gwizdo and Lian Chu at a young age, and trained with them to learn the moves and arts of the business. She is not a resident of the inn and makes few appearances, but is well known by the main characters. A victim of sexism, she has donned a male disguise in some parts to get more bounties.
Noble Kayo is an elderly doctor whom the hunters sometimes turn to for advice regarding strange conditions, such as poison and paralysis. While intelligent, he is almost completely blind and a bit absent-minded, which makes having a straightforward conversation with him very difficult.
George and Gilbert Forrestal are a two-brother hunter duo, who know Gwizdo and Lian Chu from growing up alongside them in the orphanage. They look down on Gwizdo and refer to him as a pipsqueak, and often bring up embarrassing childhood events of his. They see no room for competition, and often try to get the hunters' bounties themselves.
The program was featured in the United States on Cartoon Network for a few weeks around January 2006, but, after having its time slot moved, vanished from the line-up. Unlike the other cartoons around its Saturday morning time slot, several episodes of Dragon Hunters were rated TV-PG. It reappeared on Cartoon Network in September 2006. Up until June 2007, it was available for viewing on Cartoon Network Video. As of 2011, it was airing in the U.S. on Starz Kids & Family. 50 of the 52 episodes were watched in English on Netflix through their partnership with Starz though the episodes were out of order. They have long since been removed.
A second season of 26 additional episodes began airing in France in August 2007. International releases of both seasons have occurred in over 70 countries. The show has received a fanbase in Arabic speaking countries, after the show's repeated airing on MBC 3.
1. The Strange Taste of Cocomak
2. Dead Dragon Walking
3. Gland of the Mimikar
4. The Isle of Mist
5. The Kiwajel Thrust
6. Can I See Your License Please?
7. The Family Fortune
8. Prince Charming
9. Baby-Love, Oh Baby-Love!
10. Who's Lost Their Head Now?
11. The Name Is Dragon
12. It's a Dragon's Life
13. Desperately Seeking Zoria
14. The Return of Roger
15. Little Rumble On the Prairie
16. A Fist Full of Veggies
17. The Deep North Dragon
18. Billy Toughnut
19. There's No Place Like Home!
20. The Conjunction of the Three Moons
21. Don't Look Now
22. Unwelcome Guests
23. For a Few Veggies More
24. The Orphan Farm
25. Child's Play
26. The Collywoble Water
27. Dragontagious
28. The Borbacks' Cemetery
29. The Shipwrecker
30. Treasure Rock
31. Dragon in the Hearth
32. The Cure
33. The High Life
34. Farewell, Lian Chu
35. Porkfester's Pigfarm Island
36. The Stuff of Dreams
37. Baby in the Family
38. She Loves Me, She Loves Me Not... She Loves Me!
39. The Sweetypie Clause
40. Agheegoo
41. Combat Spores
42. The Convoy
43. The Legend of the Rain Dragon
44. The Book
45. Drago Menta
46. The Grand Tournament
47. The Body Beautiful
48. City Bound
49. Hell Around Town
50. The Master of the Dragon
51. Ghost Hunters
52. The Red Dragon
Geneon has released five DVDs (containing episodes 1 - 17) in the U.S. and Canada.
Dragon Hunters Vol. 1: "It's A Dragon's Life"
Dragon Hunters Vol. 2: "Dead Dragon Walking"
Dragon Hunters Vol. 3: "There's No Place Like Home!"
Dragon Hunters Vol. 4: "Don't Look Now"
Dragon Hunters Vol. 5: "Unwelcome Guests"
The Die Drachenjäger (Dragon Hunters) collectors' game was created and distributed by Dracco Company Ltd. This was a new addition to the Dracco Company's merchandise.
The Die Drachenjäger collectors' game featured forty collectible figurines that resembled the monsters, dragons, and the heads of the main characters, Gwizdo, Lian Chu, Zaza, Hector, and Jenneline. The game plays identically to Dracco Heads.
A collection of figurines has also been featured by Revell.
The game was released in Belgium.
The comic series "Chasseurs de Dragons" is published by Delcourt in France and co-edited in the US by Peace Arch.
Directed by Guillaume Ivernel (also Art Director) and Arthur Qwak, producer by Philippe Delarue (Futurikon), a full-length computer-animated 3D movie was made by Mac Guff Ligne Paris, Futurikon and Trixter Film GmbH. The film is presented in a different timeline, with Gwizdo, Lian Chu and Hector as roving travelers, and Zoe replacing the roles of Jennyline and Zaza.
A four-minute teaser was shown in Annecy Animation Festival and the Film Market of Cannes in 2007.
It premiered on March 19, 2008 in Russia ([1]), and on March 26 in Belgium and France, and premiered 2010 in Mexico. It premiered on April 5, 2008 in the United States as part of the Sarasota Film Festival. Rob Paulsen confirmed at a convention interview that he and Forest Whitaker were respectively voicing Gwizdo and Lian Chu.
The show's theme, "The Dragon Hunters Song", is performed by the English rock band The Cure. This track was available as a single and a track on the German compilation CD Toggo Music 11 in 2005, both now out of print.
The air vehicle that Gwizdo, Lian-chu, and Hector ride on is named after St. George.
The floating landscapes featured in the series are based on the fantasy artwork of Roger Dean (artist), but also on Shan shui traditional Chinese paintings as well as German painter Caspar David Friedrich's landscapes.
