Autumn Reeser (born September 21, 1980) is an American actress. She is best known for her roles as Taylor Townsend on the Fox series The O.C., Lizzie Grant on HBO's Entourage, Katie Andrews on ABC's No Ordinary Family, and Kylie Sinclair on ABC's Last Resort. Since 2006, she has also been one of the leading members of The Thrilling Adventure Hour, a popular staged comedy show. In 2012-16, she was the heroine of five romantic comedies for the Hallmark Channel. She will soon to be seen in Clint Eastwood's movie Sully, along with Tom Hanks.
Autumn Reeser was born in La Jolla, Southern California, the daughter of Tom and Kim Reeser. She spent her childhood developing a solid foundation for her acting career by playing a wide variety of characters in local musical theater productions, from the age of seven until seventeen. After high school, she moved to Los Angeles and enrolled in UCLA’s competitive theater program, where she studied theater history, acting technique, dance, voice and movement. She also studied acting at the Beverly Hills Playhouse.
In 2001, she started out in Hollywood in an episode of Star Trek: Voyager. Not long afterwards, she booked guest roles in dramas CSI: Crime Scene Investigation and Cold Case, and moved onto recurring parts in the sitcoms Grounded for Life, Maybe It's Me and Complete Savages.
She rose to fame through her role of Taylor Townsend on the Fox hit series The O.C. (2005-2007). The character was intended to appear in 4 episodes only, but she became crucial in the last season, turning from a former nuisance into a genuine, funny and endearing heroine.
Since the end of The O.C., she appeared as a regular on numerous TV shows: as the agent Lizzy Grant who gives Ari Gold a hard time in seasons 6 and 7 of HBO's Entourage; as the funny and childish Phoebe, Goddess of the Greek mythology in CW's Valentine; as Ashley Hastings, a brilliant young lawyer in TNT's Raising the Bar; as Katie Andrews, Julie Benz's sparkling assistant in ABC's No Ordinary Family; as the ambitious Kylie Sinclair, a repentant arms dealer in ABC's Last Resort; as Dr. Gabby Asano, Danny Williams' girlfriend in 6 episodes of CBS's Hawaii Five-0; and as the ambiguous Abby Bruce in USA Network's Necessary Roughness.
She also appeared occasionally in It's Always Sunny In Philadelphia, Ghost Whisperer, Pushing Daisies, Human Target, Royal Pains, Jane by Design, Hart of Dixie, etc.
In 2015, she took part in three episodes of ABC's The Whispers, produced by Steven Spielberg, notably for the memorable opening scene.
In April 2016, she was the main guest star of an episode of CBS's Criminal Minds: Beyond Borders. Compared to the previous episode, the ratings gained 18.59%. It will be the most widely viewed episode in season 1.
In May 2016, she appears in the trailer of The Arrangement, an upcoming series for the E! channel, where she appears in multiple episodes as pregnant talent agent Leslie Bellcamp.
Autumn Reeser played in a dozen feature films and television movies, such as the musical The American Mall, the comedy The Girl Next Door, the horror movie Lost Boys: The Tribe, the thriller The Big Bang with Antonio Banderas, the action movie Smokin' Aces 2: Assassins' Ball with Tom Berenger and the detective comedy So Undercover with Miley Cyrus.
In late 2012, she got rave reviews for Hallmark's Love at the Thanksgiving Day Parade, in which she was the main heroine. Shortly after, she became one of the new queens of Romantic Comedy on Hallmark Channel, with leading roles in such movies as Midnight Masquerade (October 2014), I Do, I Do, I Do (February 2015, where she appears in every single scene!), A Country Wedding (June 2015), Valentine Ever After (February 2016), etc.
In September 2016, she will be seen in Clint Eastwood's biopic Sully, along with Tom Hanks. She also embodies a paleontologist in the adventure movie Valley of Bones, due to be released in 2017 (top of the bill again).
Since 2006, she has been a member of The WorkJuice Players, a theater troupe primarily known for The Thrilling Adventure Hour, a popular L.A. staged production in the style of old-time radio. She stars in the Amelia Earhart segment, playing the famed pilot, traveling through time; as well as playing a wide variety of other characters in other segments. In 2015, Autumn Reeser and The Thrilling Adventure Hour were invited to perform in New York and Chicago, then Australia (Sydney) and New Zealand (Auckland and Wellington). Other members in the troupe include Paul F. Tompkins, Paget Brewster and Busy Phillips.
An accomplished singer and dancer, Autumn has played in many musicals throughout her life. She also sang in numerous cabarets around Los Angeles, including Upright Cabaret and the acclaimed For The Record: Quentin Tarantino (Show at Barre).
In November 2014, she filed for divorce from Jesse Warren. After meeting in college, they had been together since 2002.
She has 2 sons: Finneus 'Finn' James, born May 10, 2011, and Dashiell 'Dash' Ford, born November 25, 2013.
She is an adventurer and a nature lover.
She is a complete artist, with a passion for painting and photographing.
The author Patrick Loubatière wrote a 136-page book about her, entitled No Ordinary Girl, published both in English and in French.
In 2015, she was elected to SAG-AFTRA's National and Los Angeles Local Boards.
The magazine Maxim has ranked her three times among the 100 most beautiful women in the world.
