Erasmus University Rotterdam (abbreviated as EUR, Dutch: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam) is a public university located in Rotterdam, Netherlands, the city that also houses the largest port in Europe. The university is named after Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus, a 15th-century humanist and theologian.
The university has seven faculties and focuses on four areas.
Health - Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences/Erasmus MC and institute of Health Policy & Management (iBMG)
Wealth - Erasmus School of Economics and Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University
Governance - Erasmus School of Law and Faculty of Social Sciences
Culture - Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication, Faculty of Social Sciences and Faculty of Philosophy
Erasmus MC is the largest and one of the foremost academic medical centers and trauma centers in the Netherlands, whereas its economics and business school, Erasmus School of Economics and Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University are well known in Europe and beyond. In 2007, Erasmus University Rotterdam ranked top ten of business schools in Europe by "Financial Times". In 2015, Erasmus University Rotterdam is ranked by Times Higher Education as 20th in Europe and 72nd in the world, with its social sciences as 40th, and clinical and health as 35th in the world.
Erasmus University concentrates on issues of management, organisation and policy in the public and private sectors on the one hand, as well as on the field of sickness and health care. 
Erasmus University Rotterdam has existed in its present form since 1973. Its history, however, dates back to 1913, the year in which the Netherlands School of Commerce (Nederlandsche Handels-Hoogeschool or NHH) was founded through private initiative with broad support from the Rotterdam business community. The statutory recognition of higher education in commerce and economics as an academic discipline resulted in 1939 in a change of name. The NHH became the NEH or Netherlands School of Economics (Nederlandse Economische Hogeschool). The growing complexity of society led in the 1960s to the arrival of the faculties of Law and Social Sciences, followed in later decades by Philosophy, History and Arts, and Business Administration.
From 1950, the Foundation for Higher Clinical Education used its best efforts to get a full academic medical study programme established in Rotterdam, and with success: In 1966, the government established the Medical Faculty Rotterdam, housed next to Dijkzigt Hospital. Together with the Sophia Children's Hospital and the Daniel den Hoed Clinic, it forms the University Hospital Rotterdam, which as of 1 January 2003 bears the name Erasmus MC. In 1973, the Medical Faculty Rotterdam and the Netherlands School of Economics merged to become Erasmus University Rotterdam – the first university in the Netherlands named after a person, a man to whom Rotterdam owes the reputation it has held for centuries in the academic world.
Erasmus University Rotterdam has bundled its education and research in four areas.
This domain includes the Erasmus MC, the Institute of Health Policy and Management (iBMG) and the Institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA).
Erasmus MC is the new name for the university medical centre in Rotterdam, which is a merger of the Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences and the University Hospital Rotterdam (Dijkzigt, Sophia, Daniel den Hoed clinic). The biomedical cluster plays a leading role in the field of genomics (analysis of genes and proteins) and bioinformatics. The Forensic Molecular Biology department works together with the Netherlands Forensic Institute (NFI). Major long-term genetic epidemiological studies among the elderly and children are Erasmus Rotterdam Health for the Elderly (ERGO) and Generation R respectively. The institute of Health Policy and Management (iBMG) forms a bridge between medicine and the health sciences on the one hand and social sciences on the other. The institute for Medical Technology Assessment (iMTA) conducts health economic research in collaboration with both the Erasmus MC and the institute of Health Policy and Management.
This area includes the Erasmus School of Economics and the Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University. Its economics programmes and management programmes attract students and postgraduates from all over the world. The research schools Erasmus Institute for Management (ERIM) and the Tinbergen Institute attract PhD students, research fellows, PostDocs and visiting professors of repute from all corners of the world. Other joint ventures are the English-language programme International Business Administration, the Erasmus Executive Development programme (EED) and the Erasmus University Centre for Contract Research and Business Support (ERBS).
The research focuses on the organisation of business and society. This area has ground in common not only with economics and management, but also with medicine and health sciences.
As one of four concentrations of Erasmus University, culture is defined broadly with focus on the areas of media, cultural economics, and the high arts. Primary research is on society and the arts, including cultural policy, media, and social identity in modern society. Faculty has particular strengths in research, and the students tend to graduate with strong research skills for both academic and field placement.
Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM)
The Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM) is the joint research institute of the Rotterdam School of Management and the Erasmus School of Economics, both at Erasmus University Rotterdam. It aims to bring together top researchers in business and management.
Econometric Institute
Erasmus University today is seen as the leading university in Econometrics and Operational Research. Jan Tinbergen, Nobel Prize winner for Economics (1969), and Henri Theil founded the Econometric Institute and influenced both Econometrics & Management Science. Tinbergen's theories also had a political inclination, with multiple objectives of price stability and employment and policies to achieve the desired results and stabilizing the economy.
Tinbergen Institute (TI)
The Tinbergen Institute is a joint institute for research and education in economics, econometrics and finance of the University of Amsterdam, the VU University Amsterdam and the Erasmus University Rotterdam. It is one of the top research institutes and graduate schools in economics and finance in the world. It offers a research master program (MPhil) in economics and finance as well as PhD opportunities.
Transport, Infrastructure and Logistics (TRAIL)
In association with TU Delft, the TRAIL Research School is the Dutch national research school active in the fields of Transport, Infrastructure, and Logistics.
Erasmus Centre for Entrepreneurship (ECE)
Cardiovascular Research School Erasmus University Rotterdam (COEUR)
Erasmus MC (pv)
Netherlands Institute for Health Sciences (NIHES)
Erasmus MC (pv), RIVM, NKI, UMCU-UU en AMC-UvA (1992, 1997, 2002, 2008)
Postgraduate School Molecular Medicine (MM)
Erasmus MC (pv) and LEI (1994, 1999, 2004)
Medical Genetics Centre South-West Netherlands (MGC)
Erasmus MC, LEI (pv) (1992, 1997, 2003) MGC participates in the top Research School Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics (MRC), UU (pv), UvA en LEI
Helmholtz School for Autonomous Systems Research
Erasmus MC, UU (pv) (1994, 2000, 2005)
Research School Public Safety
Erasmus School of Law EUR (pv), LEI, VU, TNO and NSCR (2000, 2005)
Netherlands Institute of Government (NIG)
Faculty of Social Sciences EUR (pv), UT, LEI, RUN, VU, UU, TUD and UvT (1996, 2001, 2006)
Huizinga Instituut
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication EUR, UvA (pv), UU, RUN, UM, LEI, VU en UT (1995, 2000, 2005)
N.W. Posthumus Instituut
Erasmus School of History, Culture and Communication EUR, RUG (pv), KUN, UvA, VU, UU, RUG, LEI, WUR, RUN, KUB en TUE (1994, 1999, 2004)
Amsterdam School of Social-Public Research(ASSR)
Faculty of Social Sciences EUR, UvA (pv) (1994 en 1999, 2004)
Research School Rights of the human
Erasmus School of Law EUR, UU (pv) en UM (1995, 2000, 2005)
Experimental Psychologic Researchschool (EPOS)
Faculty of Social Sciences EUR, UM, LEI, UvA (pv) en VU (1995, 2000, 2004)
Kurt Lewin Institute
Faculty of Social Sciences EUR, VU, UvA (pv), RUG, LEI (1995, 2000, 2005)
Research School of Ethic
Faculty of Philosophy, VU, EUR, RUG, RU, UvA en UU (pv) (1994, 1999, 2006)
The EUR campus consists of two locations:
Campus Woudestein
Erasmus MC
On 9 September 2009—also known as Sustainability Day—GreenEUR was launched officially. During this day, GreenEUR organized several on-campus activities in cooperation with Greening the Campus. Since April 2010 GreenEUR is officially recognized by the Executive Board.
Economic Faculty association Rotterdam
STAR Student Association Rotterdam School of Management
STAR Management Week
Erasmus Consultancy Project
The Times Higher Education World University Rankings ranked the Erasmus University Rotterdam as follows:
The THE-QS World University Rankings (in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings) ranked the Erasmus University Rotterdam as follows:
Economics Department
The economics faculty is, according to the QS World University Rankings 2014, the 9th best in Europe (UK included) and 38th in the world in economics and econometrics, and 37th in the world in accounting and finance (10th best in Europe). 
Economics & econometrics
Statistics & operational research
Accounting & finance
According to the Shanghai University Academic Ranking of World Universities published in January 2012, Erasmus School of Economics is 7th in Europe and 45th in the world in the fields of economics and business.
According to US News  Erasmus University Rotterdam has the following global and national rankings for Economics and Business:
The Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University is considered a universal business school with major international influence (highest rank) according to Eduniversal. Among the business schools with major international influence, RSM Erasmus University is ranked as follows:
The QS Global 200 Business Schools Report, when assessing the business schools currently preferred by the most international employers for the purpose of hiring postgraduates ranked the Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University as follows:
The Financial Times EUROPEAN BUSINESS SCHOOL RANKINGS ranked the Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University as follows:
The Financial Times GLOBAL MBA RANKINGS ranked the MBA programme of Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University as follows:
The Financial Times MASTERS IN MANAGEMENT RANKINGS ranked the CEMS MSc in International Management offered by the Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University as follows:
Accreditations
The business school has achieved triple accreditation from the international accrediting bodies of management education; AMBA, EQUIS, and AACSB. Only a 40 business schools in the world have acquired triple accreditation, although it should be noted that many schools have a policy of not applying for multiple accreditations.
The Erasmus MC ranks as the top European institution in clinical medicine according to the Times Higher Education rankings.
Furthermore, the Erasmus MC (the university medical center) is ranked by The Scientist as the 5th best of the top 15 medical institutions outside the United States (ranking 2004).
According to the QS World University Ranking of universities, Erasmus MC is ranked as follows:.
Nobel laureate
Jan Tinbergen (Inaugural Recipient of Nobel Prize for Economics, 1969)
Politics
Jan Peter Balkenende (former Prime minister of the Netherlands)
Pim Fortuyn (politician)
Bianca Hoogendijk (wife of Jan Peter Balkenende, former Prime minister of the Netherlands)
Cees Veerman (the former Dutch minister of agriculture, environment and foodquality)
Alexander Rinnooy Kan (president of the Dutch Social-Economic Council)
Business
Hans Wijers, CEO AkzoNobel; former Minister of Economic Affairs the Netherlands
Scientists
Jean Paelinck (European Prize In Regional Science, 2003)
Frank Grosveld (Spinozapremie 1995)
Jan Hoeijmakers (Spinozapremie 1998)
Albert Osterhaus (head of the National Influenza Centre, and head of the world reference center for measles of the World Health Organization)
Gerrit van Poelje (founder of the Public Administration in the Netherlands)
Jo Ritzen (former Ministry of Education, Culture and Science in the Netherlands and alumnus as well)
Henri Theil (successor of Jan Tinbergen; together with Jan Tinbergen founder of the Econometric Institute, 1956)
Eelco van Asperen (computer scientist, Erasmus School of Economics)
Philosophy
Luce Irigaray
Alexander Ribbink (COO TomTom)
Sergio Orlandini (former chairman KLM)
Cor Herkströter (former chairman Royal Dutch Shell)
Herman Heinsbroek (former Minister of Economic Affairs; founder, Arcade Records)
Johan Andersen (CEO Ferd AS, Norway)
Rene Hooft Graafland (CFO Heineken)
Michiel Meurs (former CFO Ahold)
Michiel Muller (CEO Route Mobiel)
Maarten Fontein (former CEO AFC Ajax)
Frans Muller (CEO Delhaize Group)
Jan Tinbergen (first winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences)
Cor Herkströter (chairman of DSM, former chairman of Royal Dutch Shell)
Peter Bakker (former CEO TNT N.V.)
Frans van Houten (CEO Philips)
Eduard Bomhoff (former Dutch Minister of Health, Welfare and Sport and Deputy Prime Minister)
Prince Johan-Friso of Orange-Nassau (2nd son of Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands)
Peter Nijkamp (professor of regional economics, recipient of the Spinozapremie)
Sergio Orlandini (former president of the KLM)
K. Geert Rouwenhorst (professor of Finance & Deputy Director of the International Center for Finance at Yale School of Management)
Jeroen van der Veer (CEO, Royal Dutch Shell)
Onno Ruding (former vice-chairman, Citibank; former board member, ABN AMRO; former Minister of Finance in the Netherlands; former executive director of the IMF)
Frans Weisglas (former president of the House of Representatives of the Netherlands)
Nout Wellink (former president of the Dutch central bank, De Nederlandsche Bank)
P.H.M.J. Witteveen (founder OC&C strategy consultants)
Harry Brouwer (chairman Unilever Benelux B.V.)
Jan Kees de Jager (former Dutch Minister of Finance)
H.B.F. Franses (leading economist in Europe)
Nils de Baar (CEO, Ericsson Nederland)
Willem Stolwijk (former chairman Interpay Nederland)
Eddie Meijer (boardmember Houthoff Buruma, Managing Partner)
Huub Wieleman (managing partner of Deloitte Accountants BV)
Bert de Groot (Rector Magnificus Universiteit Nyenrode (former CFO and board member, Randstad Holding; Associé Boer & Croon))
Henri Termeer (president, CEO and chairman of Genzyme)
Albert Winsemius (long-time economic advisor to Singapore)
Antoine van Agtmael (former economist of the World Bank; coined the term emerging markets)
Jan Pronk (former Minister for Development Cooperation and Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment)
Cees Veerman (former Minister of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality)
Ruud Lubbers (former Dutch Prime Minister and UN High Commissioner)
Jan Pronk (former Dutch minister and UN Special Representative)
Supachai Panitchpakdi (WTO Director-General, 2002–2005)
Johan Witteveen (managing director IMF, 1973–1978 and first chairman of the Group of Thirty)
Mohammad Hatta (1st vice-president and prime minister of the Republic of Indonesia)
Neelie Kroes (European Commissioner)
Meles Zenawi (Prime minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia)
Zoran Jolevski (Macedonian Ambassador to the United States and negotiator of Macedonia naming dispute)
Paul Zimmerman (Councillor Hong Kong Southern District Council)
Melanie Schultz van Haegen (Minister of Infrastructure and the Environment)
Stefan Aartsen (former Dutch butterfly swimmer)
Aart Jan de Geus (deputy secretary-general of the OECD and former Minister of Social Affairs and Employment of the Netherlands)
Marianne Thieme (well known Dutch animal activist and politician)
Fatima Moreira de Melo (former Dutch field hockey international)
Inez Weski (well known Dutch lawyer)
Jacques Cohen (embryologist, director at reprogenetics)
Ronald van Raak (member House of Representatives of the Netherlands and non-fiction writer; studied social history and philosophy)
Frederique van der Wal (supermodel) (Did not graduate)
Erasmus University Rotterdam offers a broad range of Bachelor's programmes taught in the Dutch language, leading to a B.A., B.Sc. or LL.B. degree
Furthermore, the university offers several completely English-language Bachelor programmes. These programmes are open to students aiming for an international career in Business and/or Economics or Communication and Media. Apart from the Dutch students, about 40% of the students taking these programmes are international students from over 80 countries.
Students can choose from different types of Master programmes: (common) Master programmes, Research Master programmes, Post-experience Master programmes. Education at this level is given mostly in English.
These type of Master’s programmes leads to a M.A., M.Sc. or LL.M.
Talented graduates are given the opportunity to utilise their skills and potential in academic research. To be eligible for a Research Master, a bachelor's or master's degree must have been obtained.
The university also offers specialised knowledge and skills programmaes for further development of your professional career. These type of programmes leads to the commonly known M.A., or M.Sc., but also to professional master's degree's like MBA, MFM (Master in Financial Management), or MHM:
In addition, most departments, affiliated (research)institutes or faculties offer doctorate programs or positions, leading to the 'Doctor of Philosophy' (PhD) degree. Most of the PhD programs offered by the university are concentrated in several research schools or institutes.
Erasmus University offers special honours programmes.
Students are invited to take part if their first-year grades are well above average and if they have proved themselves to be sufficiently motivated. There are programmes are either disciplinary: special programmes for the very best students of one departments, or interdisciplinary: one of the Erasmus Honours Programme-tracks, where the very best students of the different faculties of the Erasmus University investigate, discuss, and tackle crucial contemporary scientific and societal questions from various perspectives.
After successfully completing the honours-programme, students receive a Honours-certificate and a Letter of Recommendation from the dean of their respective Faculty, or the Rector Magnificus of the EUR.
