The University of Jordan (Arabic الجامعة الأردنية), often abbreviated UJ, is a state-supported university located in Amman, Jordan. Founded in 1962, it is the largest and oldest institution of higher education in Jordan.
The university has the highest admission averages in the country and is considered the premier university in Jordan and one of the most prestigious in the Arab world. It is located in the Jubaiha area of the University District in Amman. The university currently employs about 1400 faculty staff and has more than 37,000 enrolled students.
The university was established in 1962 by a royal decree in northern Amman at that time. The area surrounding the university is one of the metropolitan districts of Amman and is called the University District.
The University of Jordan offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in 20 colleges (faculties) and institutes:
Faculty of Medicine, established in 1972. See Also: Medical education in Jordan
Faculty of Dentistry, established in 1982. The academic programs offered by the faculty are a bachelor's degree of Dental Surgery (DDS), in addition to a four-year residency program in Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. A three-year master program in Fixed and Removable Prosthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry.
Faculty of Pharmacy, established in 1980. In 2010, there were 1585 undergraduate students and 82 graduate students, and 50 academic staff members.
Faculty of Nursing, established in 1972. It offers graduate and undergraduate degrees in Clinical Nursing, Community Health Nursing, Maternal and Child Nursing.
Faculty of Science, established in 1965. As of academic year 2009–10, there were 3,489 undergraduate students, 413 graduate students, and an academic staff of 121 members. Faculty of Science comprises five departments: Mathematics, Physics and Materials Sciences, Geology, Chemistry and Biological Sciences. In 2002, the Mathematics department added an Actuarial Science program, and in 2004 the Biological Sciences added a new program of Medical Analysis.
Faculty of Agriculture offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in six programs: Horticulture and Crop Science, Land, Water and Environment Animal Production, Agricultural Economics and Agribusiness, Nutrition and Food Technology, and in Plant Protection.
Faculty of Engineering & Technology, established in 1975. It offers undergraduate and graduate degrees in Architectural, Civil, Chemical, Computer, Electrical, Industrial, Mechanical, and Mechatronics Engineering.
King Abdullah II School for Information Technology.
Faculty of Foreign Languages, established in 2008, but many of its departments were established as early as 1962. There were 3,500 students (in 2010) enrolled in this college, of whom 85% are females. 14 languages other than Arabic are taught in the Faculty of Foreign Languages.
Faculty of Arts, founded in 2008, but most of its departments date back to 1962 when the university itself was established. The faculty has seven departments. All departments offer B.A. and M.A, while the Ph.D. is awarded by the History, Geography, Psychology and Sociology departments. There are 106 Faculty members and 2926 students currently enrolled (as of spring 2010).
Faculty of Humanities & Social Sciences.
Faculty of Shari'a (Islamic Studies).
Faculty of Business.
Faculty of Law.
Faculty of Educational Sciences.
Faculty of Physical Education.
Faculty of Graduate Studies.
Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences.
Faculty of Arts and Design.
Institutes:
Institute of Archaeology [3]
International Institute for Teaching Arabic Language to Speakers of Other Languages [4]
Social Work Institute [5]
Institute of agricultural research training extension and education [6]
The Institute for the Study of Islam in the Contemporary World [7]
Centers:
Center for Photonics Research
The University of Jordan Language Center
Directed at offering courses of Arabic language as a foreign language.
The Jordan Academy of Arabic
One of 10 academies in the world that regulate Arabic language and literature. The academy is considered one of the world's top references for Arabic language and Arabic literature. The main publication of the academy is the biannual journal "The Journal of Jordan Academy of Arabic" (ISSN 0258-1094), as well as many dictionaries and other publications.
The Islamic Cultural Center [8]
Established in 1982, it provides support for researchers on Islamic studies, it also organizes courses and seminars for Islamic history and literature scholars.
The Center for Documents and Manuscripts
Established in 1972 to promote the study of Arabic and Islamic heritage, and to provide researchers with original and primary sources. The CDM library boasts 31,000 manuscripts.
Water and Environment Research and Study Center [9]
The objective of the establishment of the center is to provide research in water management and environment on the regional and international level.
Deanship of Research and Graduate Studies[10]
The University of Jordan launched its first graduate program in 1968/69, it was an MA program in Educational Administration and Guidance, the faculty cooperates with:
Jordan Media Institute which offers a one–year practical master's degree.
The National Center for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Genetics, which offers MA and High Diploma.
Center for Strategic Studies Jordan[11]
The center was established in 1998 aiming to perform political and economical studies on the national and regional level. The center also performs polls with high levels of accuracy. The center occasionally performs studies for Aljazeera.
The university hospital was established in 1973. The university has also affiliations with King Hussein Cancer Center, which was the first Cancer Center outside of the United States to be accredited by the JCI Disease Specific Certification (DSC) - (November 2007).
The University research facilities contain collections of historic documents and manuscripts as well as fossil remains that are considered to be of valuable importance for the scientific community, "to provide primary and secondary sources for researchers", among which are the world's only discovered fossil bones of the Arambourgiania pterosaur.
According to Nature journal, Jordan has the highest number of researchers per million people in the Arab World, and the 30th worldwide. In its objective to promote scientific research, the Jordanian Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific Research established collaboration with the University of Jordan Deanship of Academic Research in the early 1990s to publish several internationally peer-reviewed scientific journals on the highest standards in applied and social sciences as well as medical and pharmaceutical sciences. These journals are:
Jordan Medical Journal (ISSN 0446-9283) a peer refereed journal for researches in medical sciences and molecular biology.
Jordan Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences (ISSN 1995-7157)
Jordan Journal of Business Administration
Jordan Journal of Social Sciences
Jordan Journal for History and Archaeology
Jordan Journal of Agricultural Sciences
The University of Jordan Press issues the internationally peer-reviewed Dirasat Journal series, and several other journals in Arabic literature, Arabic and Middle Eastern history, and regional culture:
Aqlam Jadidah, a journal mainly for Arabic literature Aqlam Jadidah Journal
The Cultural Journal, a quarterly published journal in Arabic, founded in 1983. The Cultural Journal
Dirasat Journal Series:
Agricultural Sciences (ISSN 1026-3764)
Human and Social Sciences (ISSN 1026-3721)
Administrative Sciences (ISSN 1026-373X)
Educational Sciences (ISSN 1026-3713)
Engineering Sciences (ISSN 1026-3764)
Shari'a and Law Sciences (ISSN 1026-3748)
Pure Sciences (ISSN 1026-456X)
The university of Jordan has hundreds of agreements mostly for student exchange programs, of which 16 agreements are with universities in the United States such as Vanderbilt University and Murray State University.
International Association of Universities
Federation of the Universities of the Islamic World
Mediterranean Universities Union
Association of Arab Universities
The University of Jordan Student Union is the University's student body, a student council, formally called "Student Union" of 80 members is elected annually, It acts as a liaison between the students and the university administration on matters of major concern to students. It also publishes the student monthly Sawt al-Talaba (The Students' Voice). The regulations governing the Student Union have been subject to several revisions and major changes since its conception. The latest version of these regulations was written by a committee of both students (Hamdoon Khateeb, Malek Khalaileh, Khaled Gabba, Yasmeen AbuTaleb, Issam Khoury) and faculty members (Dr.Ali Mahafzah, Dr. Ali Badran, Dr. Ali Sawwa) and put into effect in 2008. 
Graduates from UJ have attained positions in many fields in many countries including government, science, business, literature, and military. Some notable alumni are:
Rami Hamdallah, prime Minister of Palestine
Maha Ali, current Minister of Industry, Trade and Supply of Jordan
John Abizaid, former Commander of the United States Central Command
Jeffrey Feltman, United States Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs.
Wadah Khanfar, former director general of the Al Jazeera Media Network.
Hoshyar Zebari, minister of foreign affairs of Iraq.
Malik R. Dahlan, International Chair, Harvard Law School Association Institution Quraysh.
Eid Dahiyat, former minister of education of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
Zu'bi M.F. Al-Zu'bi, Fellow of the Higher Education Academy United Kingdom.
Emad Abdullah Ayasrah, political analyst and writer.
Ehab Al Shihabi, Executive Director of international operations for Al Jazeera Media Network.
Yousef Al-Abed, chemist, professor at Feinstein Institute for Medical Research
University of Jordan map [12]
University of Jordan, Aqaba
List of universities in Jordan
