The Niccolò Cusano University (Italian: Università degli Studi Niccolò Cusano), often simply abbreviated as "UNICUSANO" is a private university founded in 2006 in Rome, Italy.
The Niccolò Cusano University was founded by Stefano Bandecchi. The university is named after the Roman Catholic cardinal, scientist and astronomer, Nicholas of Cusa (it: Niccolò Cusano). Until 9 July 2012, the university was located in Via Casalmonferrato and Via don Orione. The university Cusano also has a publishing company the Edizioni Edicusano and a foundation for medical research – scientific Fondazione Niccolò Cusano. In 2013 a Faculty of Engineering and Psychology has been established. It provides e-learning courses, counting 94 centers. The degree courses are delivered also in English.
UNICUSANO has academic partnership with the Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (Brazil), Foreign Trade University(Vietnam).
The university has purchased in October 2014, the Fondi Calcio (football team).
In 2006 a related publisher has been founded by Bandecchi.
These are the 6 faculties in which the university is divided into:
Faculty of Education Sciences
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Political Science
Faculty of Economics
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Psychology
The Campus is located in Via don Carlo Gnocchi, 3 – 00166 Rome. In the building there are multimedia classrooms, a theater and sports facilities.
There is a library, traditional and electronic (to the virtual library, students can access at any time).
Unicusano University provides off-campus students with about 400 places in dorms.
Inside the campus is also located the research center of the Nicholas of Cusa University.
Inside the university il located Radio Cusano Campus.
Giovanni Iacono (2006–2012)
Stefano Ranucci (2012–present)
The Rector is the highest academic authority.
Sebastiano Scarcella (2006–2010)
Giovanni Puoti (2010–2013)
Fabio Fortuna (from 1 October 2013)
Maurizio Costanzo
Giovanni Puoti
Learco Saporito
Roberta Bruzzone
Luciano Garofano
Fabio Fortuna
Unicusano Fondi Calcio
Aurelia Nuoto Unicusano
