Ankara University (Turkish: Ankara Üniversitesi) is a public university in Ankara, the capital city of Turkey. It was the first higher education institution founded in the Turkish Republic.
The university has 40 vocational programs, 120 undergraduate programs and 110 graduate programs.
Ankara University was founded by Atatürk.
School are:
The School of Law founded 1925 to train judiciaries,
The Institute of Technology for Agriculture founded 1933,
The School of Language, History and Geography founded 1935,
The School of Political Sciences (that trained public administrators under the name of Mekteb-i Mülkiye since 1859, and which was later on moved to Ankara) in 1936 upon the directive of Atatürk.
The Schools of Medicine and of Science were established in the 1940s.
Ankara University faculties are:
Faculty of Law (1925),
Faculty of Language, History and Geography (1935),
Faculty of Science (1943),
Faculty of Medicine (1945),
The university acquired the Faculties of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine which previously belonged to the Institute of Technology for Agriculture,
The School of Divinity was founded in 1949,
Faculty of Political Sciences in 1950,
The School of Pharmacy in 1960,
The School of Dentistry (1963) which became a faculty in 1977,
Faculty of Educational Sciences in 1965,
Faculty of Communication in 1965.
The Çankırı Faculty of Forestry and the Health Education Faculty were opened to education in 1996.
Faculty of Fine Arts in 2015.[1]
Faculty of Applied Sciences in 2015. www.uygulamalibilimler.ankara.edu.tr
The 17 faculties are:
Faculty of Medicine
Faculty of Dental Medicine
Faculty of Pharmacy
Faculty of Health Education
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Faculty of Political Sciences (Mekteb-i Mülkiye)
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Science
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Communication
Faculty of Educational Sciences
Faculty of Languages, History and Geography
Faculty of Theology
Faculty of Agriculture
Faculty of Sport Science
Faculty of Applied Sciences
Faculty of Fine Arts
There are also 13 institutes included into the Ankara University. They are:
Institute of Forensic Science
Biotechnology Institute
Institute of Educational Sciences
Institute of Natural sciences
Institute of Food Security
Hepatology Institute
Institute of Accelerator Technologies
Stem Cell Institute
Institute of Nuclear physics
Institute of Health Sciences
Institute of Social Sciences
Water Management Institute
Institute of Turkish Revolution History
There are 41 Research, Application and Education centers in Ankara University.
The Turkish and Foreign Languages Research and Application Center, TÖMER, was established in 1984. By 2014, TÖMER has reached 11 branches all over Turkey and the central office in Ankara. Languages taught in TÖMER include Turkish, English, German, French, Spanish, Italian, Russian, Japanese, Modern Greek, Dutch, Bulgarian, Chinese, Ottoman language, Arabic, Polish and languages of the Central Asian Turkic Republics. This list of languages constantly changes.
Ankara University Kreiken Observatory. Construction of the observatory started in 1959. In 1963 it was officially opened at the International Astronomy Conference. Along with scientific activities the observatory holds educational events for children, school children and students. When important astronomical events are taking place the observatory gives access to the observations to the public.
Ankara University Women Issues Research and Application Center (KASAUM) organizes research and educational programmes which are directed at scrutinizing and discussing women roles and problems in society as well as gender issues. In order to support and develop the research "Women research" master programme was opened in 1996.
Ankara University Small Entrepreneurship Research and Application Center (KIGAUM) runs research on problems connected to starting and maintaining small entrepreneurship activities. The center organizes educational programmes for academicians and entrepreneurs, sets up partnerships with local and international research and application centers, publishes articles and books and informes academics, business, government structures and wide public on the topics linked to entrepreneurship.
Ankara University Distance Education Center provides the opportunity of getting college or higher education as well as taking part in courses distantly.
Ankara University Center of Excellence of Superconductivity Research (CESUR) works on superconductivity research, focusing on superconducting wires, tapes and thin films which can be used in application of practical superconductivity technologies. Main attention is paid to research of MgB2, BSCCO and YBCO materials.
Ankara University European Research Center (ATAUM) is an interdisciplinary research and training center founded to promote knowledge and understanding of the European Union (EU), its member states, and Turkey-EU relations. It was founded in 1987, the year in which Turkey applied to the European Community for membership.
The Ankara University Center of Earthquakes Research objective is to hold independent research of seismic activity in Ankara and its surroundings as well as in Turkey as a whole.
Ankara University Psychiatric Crisis Research and Application Center (PKUAM) was established on October 27, 1987. The center organizes research in the sphere of psychiatric crises and their prevention, suicide and its prevention. PKUAM is a reference agent of World Health Organization.
Ankara University Brain Research Center (AU-BRC) was founded on May 21, 2009. It organizes research and scientific events connected to the studies of human brain. Scientists from such fields as linguistics, psychiatry, neurology, physiology and electrical engineering are working here together.
Ankara University Latin American Research and Application Center (LAMER) was opened in 2009 and is engaged in research on economic, political, social and cultural issues taken place in Latin America. Researchers of the Center scrutinize Latin America's development and analyze the possibility of implication of Latin American countries' positive experience in Turkey. Other goals of LAMER are to educate specialists in Latin American problems; gather documents, books, etc. in the field of the research; hold conferences and educating events and establish and maintain relationships with consolates, museums, commercial organizations, etc. from and working with Latin American region.
Ankara University Center of Research of Child's Culture (ÇOKAUM) was founded in 1994 by Prof.Dr. Bekir Onur. The center unites specialists from the spheres of psychology, sociology, anthropology, history, communication, health, etc. ÇOKAUM's objectives are to organize and hold researches in the field of child's culture; organize and participate in conferences and other academic events in Turkey and abroad; inform specialists and public about child's culture and results of researches in this area.
Ankara University Center of Research of South Eastern Europe (GAMER) was founded in 2009. Geografically South Eastern Europe is a district placed between the Carpathians, the Black Sea, the Aegean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea and the Ionian Sea and Adriatic Sea. GAMER is organazing and holding research and educational projects on the topics connected with the cultural, historical, academic, economic, etc. aspects of the development of South Eastern Europe. The center provides consultancy on related matters and publishes a scientific journal.
Ankara University Center of Research of Turkish Geography (TÜCAUM) started work in 1990. Its goals are to organize and hold research of Turkish geography; to search for, gather and keep data from researches of Turkish geography made in other countries; to support projects of Turkish researches on the related topics and to create and maintain an archive of different materials connected to Turkey and its geography.
Ankara University Research and Application Center on Political Psychology (POLPAUM).
Ankara University Center of Environmental Science.
Ankara University Center of Old Age Research and Application Center (YASAM) organizes research and projects connected to problems of aging, and older people welfare. The center publishes and takes part in publications on the topics of social, economic, health and psychologic conditions of life of people of old age.
Abdüllatif Şener - Leader of political party -former deputy prime-minister - former minister of finance
Hakim Muhammad Said - medical researcher, scholar, philanthropist, and a Governor of Sindh Province, Pakistan from 1993 until 1996
Bülent Arınç - politician and former speaker of the parliament
İsmail Hakkı Duru- theoretical physicist
Deniz Baykal - politician and party leader
Ataol Behramoglu - poet and university lecturer
Osman Birsen - former CEO of Istanbul Stock Exchange
Cengiz Çandar - journalist
Hikmet Çetin - former speaker of the parliament
Can Dündar - journalist
Adnan Sezgin - former soccer player and current businessman
Muammer Güler - Governor of Istanbul
Aydın Güven Gürkan - Academician, socialist party leader
Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu - Secretary-General of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference
Erdal İnönü -academic and politician
Mustafa Kalemli - physician and politician
Ahmet Taner Kışlalı - intellectual and former government minister
Hayri Kozakçıoğlu - Province governor and politician
Ferit Melen - former prime minister
Adnan Menderes - former prime minister
Murathan Mungan - author
Tahsin Özgüç - archaeologist
Engin Tuzun Paksoy - Professor of Plant Genetics
Ismail Faruk Paksoy - Director, ESHOT, Izmir
Ahmet Necdet Sezer - President of Turkey (2000–2007)
Cemal Süreya - poet
Tülay Tuğcu - Former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Turkey
Mehmet Keçeciler- former minister, politician
Murat Karayalçın - former Minister for Foreign Affairs; former Deputy Prime Minister and former Mayor of Ankara
Sedat Laçiner - IR lecturer, Rector, columnist and Director of International Strategic Research Organization (USAK)
Hasan Celal Güzel - former Minister of National Education
Mehmet Hakkı Suçin - Arabist
Mehmet Culum - Novelist
Selahattin Demirtaş - Politician
Deniz Çakır - Movie Player
İlber Ortaylı - Historian
Metin Feyzioğlu - Lawyer
Halil İnalcık - Historian
Güneri Cıvaoğlu- Lawyer-TV Programme Maker
İhsan Doğramacı - Doctor
Nihat Hatipoğlu- Religion Specialist
Ahmet Taner Kışlalı - Politician
Mesut Yılmaz - Politician
Engin Akyürek - Cinema player
Mehmet Görmez-Professor
Melih Gökçek-Politician
Mehmet Şimşek-Politician
Beşir Atalay-Politician
Doğu Perinçek-Politician
Muhsin Yazıcıoğlu-Politician
Mehmet Haberal-Doctor-Başkent University Rector
Çağrı Erhan-Kemerburgaz University Rector
Cüneyt Özdemir-Journalist
Tuluhan TekelioğluTv Programmer
Mithat Sancar-Politician
Özgür Doğan Cinema Film Director
Metin Altıok-Poet
Ahmed Arif-Poet
Ayşenur İslam-Politician
Selma Aliye Kavaf-Politician
Doğu Ergil-Author
Murat Karahüseyinoğlu-Cinema Director
Sezai Karakoç-Author-Poet
Suat Kılıç-Politician
Canan Tan-Author
Ece Temelkuran-Author
Saim Orhan-TV programme maker
Mirgün Cabas-Spiker
Mustafa Bumin-Lawyer
Mehmet Bekaroğlu-Doctor-Politician
Çetin Altan-Writer
Sırrı Süraya Önder-Politician
Haluk Koç-Politician
Mehmet Şimşek-Politician
Muammer Güler-Politician
Nejat Arseven-Politician
Kartal Tibet-Senarist
Zuhal Olcay-Singer
Mehdi Eker-Politician
Sema Ramazanoğlu-Politician
Naci Bostancı-Politician
Mehmet Ali Kılıçbay-Writer
Sadullah Ergin-Politician
Atilla Kart-Politician
Emine Ülker Tarhan-Politician
Mustafa Ceceli-Singer
Abdülkadir Aksu-Politician
Adnan Keskin-Politician
Mustafa Elitaş-Politician
Rector Prof.Dr. Erkan İBİŞ https://twitter.com/profdrerkanibis
List of universities in Turkey
Ankara
Ankara University, Law School
Faculty of Political Science, Ankara University
Ankara University Observatory
Ankara University on Twitter [2]
https://twitter.com/sks_ankara
http://kutuphane.ankara.edu.tr/
[3] Ankara University Bulletins
(444 5 946 ) 7/24 Call No
