University of Perugia (Italian Università degli Studi di Perugia) is a public-owned university based in Perugia, Italy. It was founded in 1308, as attested by the Bull issued by Pope Clement V certifying the birth of the Studium Generale.
The official seal of the university portraits Saint Herculan, one of the saint patrons, and the rampant crowned griffin, which is the city symbol: they represent the ecclesiastical and civil powers, respectively, which gave rise to the university in the Middle Ages.
One of the "free" universities of Italy, it was erected into a studium generale on September 8, 1308, by the Bull "Super specula" of Clement V. A school of arts existed about 1200, in which medicine and law were soon taught, with a strong commitment expressed by official documents of the City Council of Perugia. Before 1300 there were several universitates scholiarum. Jacobus de Belviso, a famous civil jurist, taught here from 1316 to 1321. By Bull of August 1, 1318, John XXII granted the privilege of conferring degrees in civil and canon law, and on February 18, 1321, in medicine and arts.
On May 19, 1355, the Emperor Charles IV issued a Bull confirming the papal erection and raising it to the rank of an imperial university. This unusual mark of favour was given to assist Perugia after the terrible plague years 1348-49. In 1362 the Collegium Gregorianum (later called the Sapienza vecchia) was founded by Cardinal Nicolò Capocci for the maintenance of forty youths. Gregory XI, by Brief of October 11, 1371 gave the privileges of a studium generale to the new faculty of theology. This faculty was suppressed and its property merged in the university in 1811. To this foundation the Sapienza nuova was transferred in 1829. The latter was founded by Benedetto Guidalotti, Bishop of Recanati in 1426, with Martin V's approval, as the Collegio di S. Girolamo. It was a free hostel for impecunious strangers who wished to study law and medicine. Suppressed by the French in 1798, it was reopened in 1807 by Pius VII as the Collegio Pio. In the Constitution of August 27, 1824, Leo XII made this the chief college of the university.
With the unification of Italy in 1860 the University of Perugia was established under the jurisdiction of the Rector and the Town Council, who issued statutes subject to approval by the Government. From 1944 to the present, the University of Perugia has achieved an outstanding reputation as one of the leading Universities in Italy.
Since the time of Napoleon I the university has occupied the old Olivetan convent of Monte Morcino. There was a faculty of mathematics down to 1884. The statutes are modelled upon those of Bologna. The number of students at different dates were: 142 in 1339, 79 in 1881, 350 in 1911.
With its 11 faculties and a vast selection of first and second level and single cycle degree programs, the University of Perugia offers its main courses in Perugia and Terni, and specialized programs throughout the Umbria region in the cities of Assisi, Città di Castello, Foligno, Orvieto, and Spoleto.
The faculties into which the university is divided are:
Faculty of Agriculture
Faculty of Economics
Faculty of Education
Faculty of Engineering
Faculty of Humanities
Faculty of Law
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Natural Sciences
Faculty of Medicine
Faculty of Pharmacy
Faculty of Political Science
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Its research programs are conducted by 29 departments with a total of 1,200 full-time staff. The University’s activities also include 25 service organizations and research centers as well as 11 libraries with rich collections and equipment. It had a total enrolment of over 31,000 students for the 2004-2005 academic year.
Orto Botanico dell'Università di Perugia, the university's botanical garden
Among its eminent teachers were:
Luca Pacioli, the father of accounting
Jacobus de Belviso, jurist
Johannes Andreas, canonist
Cino da Pistoia, (1270-1336), poet and jurist
Bartolus de Saxoferrato, (1314–27), famous civil jurist
Baldus de Ubaldis, (its figure is represented on all diplom certificates)
Gentile da Foligno, physician
Albericus Gentilis, founder of the science of international law
Francesco della Rovere (Sixtus IV)
Annibale Mariotti, physician
Annibale Vecchi, pharmacist
Domenico Bruschi, botanist
Bernardo Dessau, physicist
Giuseppe Antinori, arcadian and classicist
Francesco Coppola, politician
Among its students were:
Nicholas IV
Gregory XI
Innocent VII
Martin V
Pius III
Julius II
Julius III
Urban VII
Gregory XIV
Clement VIII
Paul V
Ruggero Oddi, physician
Michaëlle Jean, former Governor General of Canada and current Secretary-General of La Francophonie
Monica Bellucci, actress
Suze Rotolo
Pier Paolo Pandolfi
List of Italian universities
List of medieval universities
Perugia
