Haidian District (simplified Chinese: 海淀区; traditional Chinese: 海淀區) is a district of the municipality of Beijing. It lies towards the northwestern part of the urban core.
It is 431 square km in area, making it the second-largest district in urban Beijing (after Chaoyang), and is home to 2,240,124 inhabitants (2000 Census); however, in comparison to other districts, a higher percentage of its inhabitants do not have the governmental residential certificates for long-term residence, because Haidian District is where most universities are located and therefore many of its inhabitants are college students.
Since 1992, Haidian District has signed official papers and established Sister City relationship with 14 cities and districts from 10 countries of 4 continents. Some sister cities are shown below:
South America
 Santa Fe, Argentina (May 2010)
 La Falda, Cordoba, Argentina (10 September 2009)
North America
 Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States (8 February 2008)
 Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, United States (15 April 1998)
Europe
 Olympia, Peloponnesus, Greece (28 February 2008)
 Groningen, Netherlands (19/10/2004)
 Bures-sur-Yvette, Massy, Palaiseau, in Paris Region, France (4 October 1994)
East Asia
 Seodaemun-gu, South Korea (27 September 1995)
 Nerima, Tokyo, Japan (13 October 1992)
The administrative division of the district was reported as follows:
22 subdistricts of the city proper of Beijing
7 towns of which carry the "area" (地区) label:
Haidian was originally a village outside of Beijing's Inner City. It was first built in the Yuan Dynasty and became one of the eight major business areas of the capital during the Qing Dynasty and was the seat of such old shops as Lotus White, Quanjude and Hongbin House. The famed Old Summer Palace and Summer Palace, two grand imperial gardens are also among its reputed features. It became a university district after the building of the Tsinghua University and Yenching University campus in the early twentieth century. It is mentioned in Lao She's novel Camel Xiangzi as an academic village for students. After the foundation of the People's Republic, it was deliberately developed as a university area, with many of the Yan'an institutions moving there. It officially became an administrative district in June 1954. Since the reform and opening up, it has become the centre of China's IT industry. In the words of Time magazine:
During the later half of the 1990s, out of the Beijing districts, Haidian had the highest per capita GDP. During that period the GDP of Haidian (1) District grew by double digits each year.
The northwestern stretches of the 3rd Ring Road, 4th Ring Road and 5th Ring Road all run through the area.
Haidian is currently served by nine metro lines operated by Beijing Subway and one commuter line operated by BCR:
      Line 1 - Wukesong, Wanshoulu, Gongzhufen, Military Museum  9 
      Line 4 - Anheqiao North, Beigongmen, Xiyuan, Yuanmingyuan Park, East Gate of Peking University, Zhongguancun, Haidianhuangzhuang  10 , Renmin University, Weigongcun, National Library  9 , Beijing Zoo
      Line 6 - Haidian Wuluju, Cishousi  10 , Huayuanqiao, Baishiqiao South  9 
      Line 8 - Yuxin, Xixiaokou, Yongtaizhuang
      Line 9 - National Library  4 , Baishiqiao South  6 , Baiduizi, Military Museum  1 
      Line 10 - Lianhuaqiao, Gongzhufen  1 , Xidiaoyutai, Cishousi  6 , Chedaogou, Changchunqiao, Huoqiying, Bagou, Suzhoujie, Haidianhuangzhuang  4 , Zhichunli, Zhichunlu  13 , Xitucheng, Mudanyuan, Jiandemen
      Line 13 - Dazhongsi, Zhichunlu  10 , Wudaokou, Shangdi, Xi'erqi  Changping 
      Line 15 - Qinghuadongluxikou, Liudaokou, Beishatan
      Changping Line - Xi'erqi  13 
      BCR Line S2 - Qinghuayuan, Qinghe
The China National Space Administration has its headquarters in the district.
A central part of Haidian's economy, the Zhongguancun electronics district, hosts the Beijing offices of many software and computer-technology companies.
Baidu has its headquarters in the Baidu Campus.
Sohu has its headquarters in the Sohu.com Internet Plaza.
Sinosteel's headquarters are in the Sinosteel Plaza (simplified Chinese: 中钢国际广场; traditional Chinese: 中鋼國際廣場; pinyin: Zhōnggāng Guójì Guǎngchǎng) in Haidian District.
Youku has its headquarters on the fifth floor of Sinosteel Plaza.
Wumart has its headquarters in the Wumart Commercial Building (simplified Chinese: 物美商业大厦; traditional Chinese: 物美商業大廈; pinyin: Wù Měi Shāngyè Dàshà) in Haidian District.
aigo's head office is in the Ideal Plaza (simplified Chinese: 理想国际大厦; traditional Chinese: 理想國際大廈; pinyin: Lǐxiǎng Guójì Dàshà) in the Haidian District.
China Postal Airlines has its headquarters on the 11th through 14th floors of the Ziyu Office Building (simplified Chinese: 紫玉写字楼; traditional Chinese: 紫玉寫字樓; pinyin: Zǐyù Xiězìlóu) in Haidian District.
The Beijing Civil Aircraft Technology Research Center of COMAC (北京民用飞机技术研究中心) has its offices on the 8th floor of the Beijing Olympic Building (S: 北京奥运大厦, T: 北京奧運大廈, P: Běijīng Àoyùn Dàshà) in Haidian District.
Xiaomi has its headquarters in the Office Building of Huarun Wucai City (华润五彩城写字楼).
Google has its Beijing office in Tsinghua Science Park Bldg 6
Institutions of higher education in Haidian include:
Beihang University (formerly Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics)
Beijing Film Academy
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Language and Culture University
Beijing Normal University
Capital Normal University
China Agricultural University
China University of Geosciences Beijing
China University of Political Science and Law
Minzu University of China (formerly Central University for Nationalities)
Peking University
Renmin University of China
Tsinghua University
University of International Relations
University of Science and Technology Beijing
The Beijing Municipal Commission of Education (simplified Chinese: 北京市教育委员会; traditional Chinese: 北京市教育委員會; pinyin: Běijīng Shì Jiàoyùwěiyuánhuì), the local education authority, has its headquarters in the Beijing Olympic Building.
Institutions of secondary education include:
High School Affiliated to Renmin University of China
Beijing 101 Middle School
Private schools include:
Beijing Haidian Foreign Language Shi Yan School (elementary through senior high school)Beijing Haidian International School
Saint Paul American School
Zhongguancun
Wudaokou
Madian
Xinjiangcun (demolished)
The Chinese Ice Hockey Association, which governs ice hockey and bandy in China, has its offices at 56, Zhongguacun South Street in Haidian District.
