Paris Diderot University, also known as Paris 7 (French: Université Paris Diderot (Paris 7), is a leading French university located in Paris. It is one of the heirs of the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Paris (together with Paris 6), which, founded in the mid-12th century, was one of the earliest universities established in Europe. It adopted its current name in 1994.
Featuring two Nobel Prize laureates, a Fields Medal winner and two former French Ministers of Education among its faculty or former faculty, the university is famous for its teaching in science, especially in mathematics. Indeed, many fundamental results of the theory of Probability have been discovered at one of its research centers, the Laboratoire de Probabilités et Modèles Aléatoires (Laboratory of Probability and Random Models). The university is also known for its teaching in psychology, which adopts a specific approach drawing from both the domains of psychopathology and psychoanalysis.
The university also hosts many others disciplines: currently, there are 2300 educators and researchers, 1100 administrative personnel and 26,000 students studying humanities, science, and medicine.
Paris Diderot University is a founding member of the higher education and research alliance Sorbonne Paris Cité which is a Public Institution for Scientific Cooperation bringing together four renowned Parisian universities and four higher education and research institutes.
Formerly based at the Jussieu Campus in the 5th arrondissement, the university moved to a new campus in the 13th arrondissement, in the Paris Rive Gauche neighborhood. The first buildings were brought into use in 2006. The university has many facilities in Paris, and two in other parts of the general area. In 2012, the university completed its move in its new ultra-modern campus.
There are:
PRG (Paris Rive Gauche) - Main campus
Jussieu Campus - former Main campus
Charles V - English studies
RFF Building - Administrative offices
Javelot - Geography, history and social science (GHSS)
Chateau des Rentiers - Linguistics
Garancière - Odontology
Xavier-Bichat - Medicine
Lariboisière Saint-Louis - Medicine
St Louis Hospital - Hematology
Rue de Paradis - Medicine
Paris Diderot University offers courses in many fields, each taught in a different sections of the university called UFR - Unité de Formation et de Recherche (Unity of Teaching and Research).
UFR of Life Sciences
UFR of Chemistry
UFR of Computer Sciences
UFR of Mathematics
UFR of Physics
UFR of Science of the Earth, Environment and Planets
UFR of English studies
UFR of Cross-cultural and Applied Languages studies
UFR of Geography, History and Social sciences
UFR of Languages and Cultures in East Asia studies (Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Vietnamese)
UFR of Letters, Art and Cinema
UFR of Linguistics
UFR of Psychoanalytical Studies (formerly Human clinical sciences)
UFR of Social Sciences
UFR of Medicine
UFR of Odontology
There are:
1 Diplôme universitaire de technologie (called DUT)
27 Different bachelor's degrees (Licence)
32 Different master's degrees (116 specialities)
1 Engineering school
24 different Ph.Ds (Doctorat)
Among these diplomas, the Master of Science in Mathematical Finance (M2MO) – also known as DEA Laure Elie – which is one of the two most selective French postgraduate degrees in Quantitative Finance.
Jaak Aaviksoo, Estonian Minister of Defense
Claude Allègre, Minister of National Education (France) from 1997 to 2000 and member of the Académie des sciences (France)
Artur Avila, 2014 Fields Medal
Jean-Luc Bennahmias, French Member of the European Parliament
Bernard Cerquiglini, rector of the Agence universitaire de la Francophonie
Michel Ciment, French journalist, writer and president of FIPRESCI
Vincent Courtillot, geophysicist, member of the Académie des sciences (France)
Jean Dausset, Nobel Prize in Medicine 1980
Luc Ferry, French Minister of National Education from 2002 to 2004
Julia Kristeva, Bulgarian-French psychoanalyst, sociologist and feminist
Thierry Morand, French biocontainment expert and entrepreneur.
Élisabeth Roudinesco, French historian and psychoanalyst
Jean-Michel Savéant, member of the Académie des sciences (France)
Justin E. H. Smith, Author and professor of history and philosophy of science
George Fitzgerald Smoot, Nobel Prize in Physics 2006 for the discovery of anisotropies in the cosmic microwave background radiation
Stefano Zacchiroli, Former Debian Project Leader.
