The Polytechnic University of Turin (Italian: Politecnico di Torino) is an engineering partially public university based in Turin, Italy. Established in 1859, Politecnico di Torino is Italy’s oldest technical university. The university offers several courses in the fields of Engineering, Architecture and Industrial Design.
The Regio Politecnico di Torino (Royal Turin Polytechnic) was established in 1906. The present-day institution was preceded by the Scuola di Applicazione per gli Ingegneri (Technical School for Engineers, which was founded in 1859 in application of the Casati law) and the Museo Industriale Italiano (Italian Industry Museum) founded in 1862 by the Ministry of Agriculture, Trade and Industry. The Technical School for Engineers was part of the University, which led to technical studies being accepted as part of higher education. In those times Italy was about to begin a new industrial era, which the Industry Museum was to address more directly thanks to famous scholars and researchers dealing with new subjects such as electrotechnics and building science. The new school was deeply concerned with the needs of the Italian society and its development perspectives.
Like other well known Polytechnic Schools in the first years of the 20th century the Regio Politecnico di Torino had several goals and began contacting the European academic world and the Italian industry. Aeronautics began as a subject. Students from all over Italy came to Turin and found in the new laboratories built for the study of various subjects ranging from chemistry to architecture in a positive and helpful atmosphere. During November 1958 a large complex of buildings located in Corso Duca degli Abruzzi was inaugurated in order to expand the volume and the facilities offered by the historical headquarters of Valentino Castle (Castello del Valentino), given in 1859 to the Technical School for Engineers.
For more than 150 years, the Politecnico di Torino has been one of the most prestigious public institutions at both the International and the Italian levels concerning education, research, technological transfer and services in all sectors of architecture and engineering. In the 1990s, new teaching campuses were opened in Alessandria, Biella, Ivrea, Mondovì and Vercelli. A long history, which bore out the University as a reference point for education and research in Italy and in Europe, a Research University of international level which attracts students from more than 100 countries and which activates about 800 collaborations per year with industries, public institutions and local organizations. The attention to theoretical and applied research, the knowledge and development of cutting edge technologies, the concreteness and realism concerning the management of a manufacturing process or the organization of a service, the care of functionality without ignoring design, the analysis and proposition of solutions to the challenges of the society of today in order to plan a sustainable future: graduates from the Politecnico di Torino receive an education that goes far beyond technical knowledge.
Campuses of the Politecnico di Torino draw inspiration from the structure of Anglo-Saxon ones, with multipurpose buildings for teaching, basis and applied research and services to the students in Turin, and a regional network of technological centers (Alessandria, Biella, Mondovì, Vercelli, Verrès), dedicated to research activities, technological transfer, specialist education and services to the region.
The historical and representative base of the Politecnico is in the town, on the River Po: the Castle of Valentino, a House of Savoy of the 17th Century. It is the main teaching campus for Architecture and has an area of 23.000 sq. m. The big complex in corso Duca degli Abruzzi - with 122.000 sq. m., the main campus of Engineering - was opened in 1958 and it is completed by the Cittadella Politecnica: a modern complex of 170,000 sq. m. adjoining to the main building, including areas dedicated to students, research activities, technological transfer and services. The newest campus is the Design and Sustainable Mobility Citadel, in an area adjoining to the manufacturing establishment of Mirafiori, FIAT manufacturing facility which has been remodeled as well as the Lingotto building, which hosts the Master School.
STUDENTS
32.000 students (A.Y. 2012/2013)
30% women
42% students from outside Piedmont
16.5% international students
4,900 first year students (A.Y. 2012/2013)
12% first year international students
400 Specialization Master students
633 PhD students (A.Y. 2012/2013)
PROGRAMS
28 Degree programs (first cycle level - Bachelor)
32 MS Degree programs (second cycle level - Master)
18 Courses completely in English
6 I level Specialization Masters
27 II level Specialization Masters
24 PhD programs
6 Advanced training programs
1 Specialization program
GRADUATES
5,371 graduates in 2012
2,802 first cycle (Bachelor) level graduates
(average age: 24 years old)
2,569 second cycle (Master) level graduates
(average age: 26 years old)
Employment rate of second cycle (Master) students one year after graduation (Almalaurea - def. ISTAT-Workforce): 74.5% (above the national average of 60%) 42% have permanent contracts (above the national average of 34%)
The Politecnico is a "Research University" aknowledgeded as a centre of excellence in all over the world for the qualifying research areas of Architecture and Engineering. The development of the fields of excellence, the investment on frontier subjects, and also the support to the curiosity driven research allow a virtuous mix of basis and applied research.
Research activities, in particular, are structured in four macro-areas: Industrial Engineering; Information Technology; Management and Mathematical Engineering; Civil, Environmental, Architecture and Design Engineering.
DEPARTEMENTS
The two souls characterizing Departments are research and teaching. Departments indeed carry out duties of coordination, promotion of research, organization and management of the teaching activity, following the recent reform of the University system.
DAD - Department of Architecture and Design
DAUIN - Department of Control and Computer Engineering
DENERG - Department of Energy
DET - Department of Electronics and Telecommunications
DIATI - Department of Environment, Land and Infrastructure Engineering
DIGEP - Department of Management and Production Engineering
DIMEAS - Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering
DISAT - Department of Applied Science and Technology
DISEG - Department of Structural, Geotechnical and Building Engineering
DISMA - Department of Mathematical Sciences
DIST - Interuniversity Department of Regional and Urban Studies and Planning
The Politecnico di Torino has long faced the biggest international technical schools in education and research fields. The first agreements date back to nineties and their number increased very soon thanks to collaborations on student mobility.
The University was able to create a true international and multicultural environment and a world research network on the main subjects of reference by strengthening education in English; supporting international mobility of students and teachers; attracting foreign students, doctoral students, and researchers; taking part in combined research projects and programs.
A Politecnico's network of campuses abroad strengthens international relations with countries whose collaboration has strengthened over the years, especially with China, where the Italian-Chinese campus in the Tongji University of Shanghai is active since 2006. The most of the foreign students of the Politecnico are from China and the collaboration with the Asian country recently expanded also to research fields, especially after the creation in Beijing, under the aegis of the Italian Ministry of the Environment, of the Center EC2 - EU-China Clean Energy Center, for the implementation of the use of renewable energy sources in the country.
Additionally, Politecnico di Torino has agreement with Turin Polytechnic University in Tashkent Uzbekistan. There Politecnico di Torino prepare students in the field of Mechanical Engineering, Mechatronics, Computer science and Civil engineering.
The main courses offered are architecture, architectural engineering, industrial design, aerospace engineering, automotive engineering, biomedical engineering, chemical engineering, civil engineering, computer engineering, electrical engineering, electronic engineering, environmental engineering, energy engineering, engineering physics, material engineering, mechanical engineering, mechatronics, nuclear engineering, nanotechnology, production engineering, petroleum engineering, telecommunications engineering and textile engineering.
The Polytechnic has research links with local and international companies, reaching about 700 yearly research contracts with firms such as Thales Alenia Space, Intel, Motorola, Compaq, Ferrari, Fiat, Leonardo-Finmeccanica, General Motors, Telecom Italia, Freescale, Vishay, Avio, Agusta, IBM, Microsoft, Nokia, Pininfarina, Bosch, General Electric, STMicroelectronics and ESA.
The Politecnico di Torino is a member of
CESAER (Conference of European Schools for Advanced Engineering Education and Research). CESAER is the association encompassing 57 leading European universities of technology committed to engineering education that is based on excellent research and close cooperation with industry and other societal actors.
CLUSTER (Consortium Linking Universities of Science and Technology for Education and Research) which is a network of leading European Universities of Technology
European Network for Training and Research in Electrical Engineering
Top Industrial Managers for Europe (TIME) network
European Spatial Development Planning (ESDP) network.
According to ARWU Ranking 2013, Politecnico Di Torino is 1st in Italy and 8th in Europe for Engineering. and in the same year according to QS World University Rankings among the engineering universities it was ranked 68th in the world (within top 15 in Europe)  and for electrical engineering the university was ranked 1st in Italy, 8th in Europe and 30th in the world.
University's Innovative Enterprise and Business Incubator 'I3P' was ranked in 2014 as the 5th best in Europe and 15th overall in the world by UBI Index 
Politecnico Di Torino is 1st in Italy when it comes to awarding of Public funds of Fondo di Finanziamento Ordinario according to a table on Universities performances, thus receives the highest funding in Italy.
The Automotive Engineering program, conceived in collaboration with Fiat Group, has been consistently ranked among the top three in Europe for the past ten years.
Most of the graduates with a master degree find jobs within few days after graduation. A special section called Stage&Jobs has been created to improve contact between students and industry.
ESDP-Network
List of Italian universities
Top Industrial Managers for Europe
