The University of Maine (also referred to as UMaine or Maine) is a public research university located in Orono, Maine, United States. The university was established in 1865 as a land grant college and is the flagship university of the University of Maine System. Having an enrollment of approximately 11,000 students, UMaine is the largest university in the state and is the only institution in Maine classified as a research university (RU/H) by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. The University of Maine's athletic teams are nicknamed the Black Bears and they are Maine's only Division I athletics program.
University of Maine was founded in 1862 as a function of the Morrill Act, signed by President Lincoln. Established in 1865 and originally named the Maine College of Agriculture and the Mechanic Arts, the Maine College opened on September 21, 1868, changing its name to the University of Maine in 1897.
By 1871, curricula had been organized in Agriculture, Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and electives. The Maine Agricultural and Forest Experiment Station was founded as a division of the university in 1887. Gradually the university developed the Colleges of Life Sciences and Agriculture (later to include the School of Forest Resources and the School of Human Development), Engineering and Science, and Arts and Sciences. In 1912 the Maine Cooperative Extension, which offers field educational programs for both adults and youths, was initiated. The School of Education was established in 1930 and received college status in 1958. The School of Business Administration was formed in 1958 and was granted college status in 1965. Women have been admitted into all curricula since 1872. The first master's degree was conferred in 1881; the first doctor's degree in 1960. Since 1923 there has been a separate graduate school.
Near the end of the 19th century, the curriculum was expanded to place greater emphasis on liberal arts. As a function of this shift, new faculty hired during the early 20th century included Caroline Colvin, chair of the history department, and the first woman in the nation to head a major university department.
In 1906, The Senior Skull Honor Society was founded to "publicly recognize, formally reward, and continually promote outstanding leadership and scholarship, and exemplary citizenship within the University of Maine community."
On April 16, 1925, 80 women met in Balentine Hall — faculty, alumnae, and undergraduate representatives — to plan a pledging of members to a new honorary organization. This organization was called "The All Maine Women" because only those women closely connected with the University of Maine were elected as members. On April 22, 1925, the new members were inducted into the honor society.
When the University of Maine System was incorporated, the school was renamed by the legislature over the objections of the faculty to the University of Maine at Orono (or UMO). This was changed back to the University of Maine in 1986.
University of Maine is the flagship of the University of Maine System. The president of the university is Susan J. Hunter,. The senior administration governs cooperatively with the Chancellor of the University of Maine system, James H. Page and the sixteen members of the University of Maine Board of Trustees (of which fifteen are appointed by the Governor of Maine and one is the current Maine State Commissioner of Education). The Board of Trustees has full legal responsibility and authority for the university system. It appoints the Chancellor and each university President, approves the establishment and elimination of academic programs, confers tenure on faculty members, and sets tuition rates/operating budgets.
UMaine is also one of a handful of colleges in the United States whose Student Government is incorporated. Student Government was formed in 1978 and incorporated in 1987. They are classified as a 501(c)(3) not for profit corporation. It consists of a legislative branch, which passes resolutions, and an executive branch, which helps organize on-campus entertainment and guest speakers, works with new and existing student organizations, and performs other duties. Other organizations fall under the umbrella of Student Government Inc., including representative boards, community associations, and many other student groups. The Maine Campus, the student newspaper, is also incorporated and does not operate under or receive money from student government.
Situated on Marsh Island, between the Penobscot and Stillwater rivers, the University of Maine is the only Land Grant University in the nation located on an island. Occupying the small city of Orono, population ~9,500, the 660-acre (2.7 km2) campus has a total enrollment (2012–2013) of 10,901 students. The campus is equipped with thirty-seven academic buildings, thirty administrative buildings, eighteen residence halls, eighteen specific laboratory facilities, fourteen Greek life houses, ten sports facilities, five museums, four dining facilities, two convenience stores, a student union, a cafe, a pub, an 87,000-square-foot (8,100 m2) state of the art recreation and fitness center, and a 200'x200' air supported athletic/recreational dome.
The original campus plan was designed by landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted, who also designed Central Park in New York City and the White House grounds in Washington, D.C. Significant portions of Olmsted's plan, including the Front Lawn, were adopted during the school's first fifty years, and were oriented toward the Stillwater River. A second master plan was produced in 1932 by Carl Rust Parker of the Olmsted Brothers firm, in which the campus center was reoriented to the Mall, an open grassy area between the Raymond H. Fogler Library and the Memorial Gym. The Mall is further bordered by one residence and five academic halls. The campus is essentially divided into three sections (northern, southern, and hilltop), all of which are within close proximity to (or border directly on) the Mall. The northern section includes many of the athletic facilities, including the Alfond Arena(basketball, hockey), Morse Field at the Alfond Sports Stadium (football, track and field), Larry Mahaney Diamond (baseball), Kessock Field (softball), the Field Hockey Complex (field hockey), and the Mahaney athletic/recreational dome. Other buildings that occupy the northern section of campus include the Cutler Health Center, two administrative halls, three residence halls, and multiple academic halls. The southern section of campus includes the Memorial Student Union, the Maynard F. Jordan Observatory, Lengyel Gymnasium and Athletic Field, the Buchanan Alumni House, as well as multiple administrative, residence, and academic halls. The recently renovated Collins Center for the Arts is also located on the southern part of campus, and not only provides the Hutchins Concert Hall, a 1,435-seat venue for performing artists from around the world, but also houses the Hudson Museum, known for its contemporary Native American art, as well as displays that are culturally specific to the indigenous people of Maine. The Hilltop section of campus is populated largely with residence halls but also includes the 7-acre (2.8 ha) Lyle E. Littlefield Ornamental Gardens, as well as academic and recreational facilities. The campus is also designated as an arboretum.
The pre-1915 core of the campus, covering its earliest period of development, was listed as a historic district on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978; this was expanded to include the second major phase of development (through the end of World War II) in 2010.
Greek life has existed at the University of Maine since 1874. The presence of Greeks still exists strongly today, with approximately 14% of University of Maine undergraduates members of Greek letter organizations.
University of Maine is one of 16 colleges and universities listed in Princeton Review's "Green Honor Roll" (2011). Several of the nation's leading research universities, including Virginia Tech, Georgia Tech, Oregon State, Arizona State and the University of Washington are also on that prestigious list, as are Harvard and Northeastern. Recognizing schools for their commitment to sustainability, the Green Honor Roll lists only those 16 institutions that received the highest possible score on The Princeton Review green rating. The guide lauds UMaine for its recycling programs, green-certified buildings and free shuttle bus service. It also notes the fact that UMaine has a sustainability coordinator, a sustainability council, and "Eco Reps" in its residence halls.
The University of Maine has a sustainability council composed of students, faculty, administrators, and staff, and employs a full-time sustainability coordinator. A green loan fund provides capital for energy efficiency and renewable energy investments. The university has committed to achieving carbon neutrality by 2040, and two residential-scale solar thermal systems are in place on Nutting Hall and Sebec House. The University of Maine composts food scraps from dining facilities, and York Dining Hall has gone trayless to reduce waste. For all new campus construction, LEED Silver standards are required. The Blue Bike program refurbishes abandoned bikes and rents them to students free of charge, providing a means of alternative transportation on and around-campus.
The University of Maine offers 90 undergraduate major programs organized in five Colleges: the College of Business, Public Policy and Health; the College of Education and Human Development; the College of Engineering; the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences; and the College of Natural Sciences, Forestry and Agriculture. UMaine also is home to one of the nation's oldest honors programs, now called the Honors College. The Honors College offers academically qualified students an opportunity for intensive, interdisciplinary study. Students are invited to become part of the Honors College during the admissions review process. UMaine also offers a wide array of graduate programs, including more than seventy master's degree programs and thirty doctorate programs.
The University of Maine is one of only a handful of institutions to offer a combined developmental/clinical Ph.D. to students accepted into their clinical psychology Ph.D. program, as well as advanced degrees with distinct concentrations in developmental psychology, social psychology, cognitive psychology, and behavioral neuroscience. The University of Maine has a strong commitment to developing the next generation of neuroscience researchers and educators, thus along with offering a Ph.D. in psychological science with a concentration in behavioral neuroscience, they also offer a neuroscience concentration for Ph.D. students studying biomedical science.
It is the only institution in Maine ranked as a national university in the U.S. News and World Report annual rankings. U.S. News categorizes UMaine as an institution that offers "a full range of undergraduate majors, master's, and doctoral degrees."
UMaine is one of only four institutions in Maine (along with Bowdoin, Bates, and Colby) accredited to award membership into the Phi Beta Kappa honor society.
The university is also the birthplace of the Phi Kappa Phi honor society, recognizing high academic achievement across all disciplines.
The Raymond H. Fogler Library is the largest in Maine and serves as one of its intellectual hubs, attracting scholars, professors, and researchers from around the state. A collection of rare and ancient manuscripts, as well as about two million government publications, augment the University's collection. The Special Collections Unit includes the Stephen King (author and UMaine alumnus) papers, which attract researchers from across the globe.
UMaine hosts the Intensive English Institute, an English as a second language program designed to help students develop their English language skills for success in school, business, and social communication.
With 211 faculty and 2,742 students (fall 2011), the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences offers Maine's most comprehensive liberal arts experience.
The University of Maine is also home to the Maine Business School, the largest business school in the state. Paris-based international educational consulting organization Eduniversal has included the Maine Business School at the University of Maine among its selection of 1,000 of the world's best business schools, ranking it as an "excellent business school-nationally strong and/or with continental links." In 2011, U.S. News and World Report ranked the Maine Business School among the nation's best business colleges 
The Canadian-American Center, an institution that focuses on Canadian-American studies is based at the University of Maine.
The University of Maine receives overall accreditation by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, the oldest regional accrediting association in the United States, as well as from many other professional societies, including the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business, the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology, the American Chemical Society, the American Dietetic Association, the American Psychological Association, the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education, the Computing Sciences Accreditation Board, the Council on Social Work Education, the National Association of Schools of Music, the National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration, the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, the Society of American Foresters, and the Society of Wood Science and Technology.
The University of Maine received the following classifications from The Carnegie Foundation:
The Fall 2014 admissions data are as follows:
The 2014–2015 overall enrollment is as follows:
8,682 Undergraduate degree-seeking students
657 Undergraduate non-degree students
1,466 Graduate degree-Seeking students
481 Graduate non-degree students
9,108 Full-time students
2,178 Part-time students
The 2014–2015 tuition data are as follows:
The 2013–2014 fees are as follows:
The University of Maine is one of the National Science Foundation's top 100 public universities for research. In FY10, UMaine exceeded $100 million in external expenditures for research — 86% of which was federal funding. Leading sectors of the university in generating external support are advanced materials, marine sciences, climate change, environmental studies, forestry, precision manufacturing, and aquaculture. Undergraduate research is a priority at UMaine, and in 2008, the Center for Undergraduate Research was established to connect students with faculty projects that suit their interests.
The University of Maine has several research areas that operate as independent units under the umbrella of the University of Maine. While these units house and fund faculty, staff, and students from a variety of academic backgrounds and colleges, the research units are indendent of the traditional departmental and college structure. The full list of independent research units at the University of Maine include:
The University of Maine Advanced Structures and Composites Center, founded in 1996 with support from the National Science Foundation, provides research, education, and economic development encompassing material sciences, manufacturing and engineering of composites and structures. The center has several research and development projects which have gained national or international notoriety including the VolturnUS 1:8, composite arch bridge system, the Modular Ballistic Protection System (MBPS), and others.
The center is the leading member of the DeepCwind Consortium, whose mission is to establish the State of Maine as a national leader in deepwater offshore wind technology.
The University of Maine participates in the NCAA's Division I level, and is a member of the Colonial Athletic Association for football, Hockey East for ice hockey, and the America East Conference for all other sports. The school has won two national championships, both in men's ice hockey. In 1993, they defeated Lake Superior State University 5-4 behind a third period hat trick by Jim Montgomery. In 1999, they defeated rival University of New Hampshire 3-2 in overtime on a goal by Marcus Gustafsson.
In 1965, the football team competed in the Tangerine Bowl in Orlando, Florida against East Carolina. They were beaten in the game 31-0, but remain the only team from Maine to compete in a bowl contest.
The baseball team has participated in seven College World Series, six of them under coach John Winkin between 1976 and 1986, and one under Jack Butterfield in 1964. The Black Bears achieved two third-place finishes in 1964 and 1982.
Although the official fight song of UMaine is "For Maine", the school song is the more-known, "Stein Song". Written by Lincoln Colcord (words) and E. A. Fenstad (music), the tune rose to fame when Rudy Vallée arranged the current version. Vallee attended Maine from 1921–1922 before transferring to Yale, and his popularity helped make the song a national favorite. To this day, the "Stein Song" remains the only college fight song to ever reach number one on the pop charts, achieving this distinction in 1930. According to College Fight Songs: An Annotated Anthology, by Studwell and Schueneman, the "Stein Song" is one of the very best fight songs of all time.
In addition to varsity athletics, the university offers many club sports through its Campus Recreation department. Sport clubs represent UMaine by competing against teams and clubs from other universities and colleges. National governing bodies for each club provide competition guidelines and league structure.
Sport clubs are student-led and student-administered. Each has a budget that is run through Campus Recreation, which in part funds nearly all clubs. Clubs are eligible for funding through Campus Recreation after they have been active for at least one year and have a membership minimum of ten members. Current club sports include alpine skiing, baseball, crew, cricket, cycling, fast pitch softball, field hockey, golf, ice hockey, lacrosse, nordic skiing, roller hockey, rugby, shotokan karate, soccer, tennis, table tennis, tackle football, ultimate, and volleyball.
Doris Twitchell Allen, Children's International Summer Villages founder
Lawrence Bender, film producer (Pulp Fiction and Good Will Hunting)
Biff Elliot, actor and sportscaster
Clarine Coffin Grenfell, Class of 1932, author and poet
Rick Hautala, Class of 1970, author
Donald Holder, Class of 1980, Tony-winning Broadway lighting designer ("The Lion King")
Stephen King, Class of 1970, author
Tabitha King, Class of 1971, author, wife of Stephen King
Nick DiPaolo, Class of 1984, comedian
Mildred Brown Schrumpf, Class of 1925, Maine food educator and columnist
Brad Sullivan, actor
Rudy Vallée, Attended 1921-1922, Jazz singer and pop star of the 1920s
John Baldacci, Class of 1986, former Governor of Maine
Janet Bewley (Wisconsin Politician), member of the Wisconsin Legislature
Joseph E. Brennan, former Governor of Maine, member of the United States House of Representatives
Styles Bridges, former Governor of New Hampshire, senator
Emily Cain, State Legislator, former candidate for U.S. Congress
Ben Chipman, State Representative from Portland
Patricia M. Collins, two-term mayor of Caribou, Maine, and civic leader
Samuel Collins, Jr., State Senator and Maine Supreme Court Associate Justice
Linda Smith Dyer, J.D. 1980, lawyer, lobbyist, women's rights activist, co-founder of the Maine Women's Lobby
Matthew Dunlap, Secretary of State of Maine
Peter Edgecomb, State Representative from Caribou (2004-2012)
Keith Farnham, member of Illinois House of Representatives
Wallace Rider Farrington, Class of 1891, former Governor of Hawai'i, founder of University of Hawai'i
Charles Harlow, State Representative from Portland
Debra Lee Hovey, member of the Connecticut House of Representatives
Paul LePage, Governor of Maine (2010–present)
Kenneth P. MacLeod, Class of 1940, President of the Maine Senate
John R. McKernan, Jr., former Governor of Maine
Leigh Saufley, State of Maine Supreme Court Chief Justice
David Slagger, State Representative representing the Maliseet people
Olympia Snowe, Class of 1969, U.S. Senator
Colby Chandler, Class of 1950, former CEO, Eastman Kodak
Francis Clergue, businessman, industrialist
Maurice K. Goddard, former secretary of the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, a driving force in the creation of 45 Pennsylvania state parks during his 24 years in office.
Patrice Oppliger, Assistant Professor of Communication, Boston University College of Communication
Robert A. Rushworth, Class of 1951, Air Force test pilot
Harold Beverage, Class of 1915, inventor, Vice President of R&D at RCA Communications
Pearce Paul Creasman, Class of 2003, Egyptologist & archaeologist; Director, University of Arizona Egyptian Expedition
Francis T. Crowe, Class of 1905, Civil Engineer, chief engineer of the Hoover Dam, namesake of the Francis Crowe Society
Leslie Glasgow (Class of 1948) - biologist and conservationist who was assistant Secretary of the Interior in the first Nixon administration
Leslie Holdridge, Class of 1931, botanist
Ashok Jhunjhunwala, Class of 1979, professor at IIT Madras and Padma Shri recipient
Bernard Lown, Class of 1942, Nobel Peace Prize winner
Richard Lutz, Class of 1975 - deep sea vent researcher, director of the Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences
Lore Alford Rogers, Class of 1896, USDA dairy scientist and bacteriologist
Bob Beers, NHL player, Boston Bruins, Tampa Bay Lightning, Edmonton Oilers, New York Islanders; color commentator on Bruins radio broadcasts
Jovan Belcher, former NFL player for the Kansas City Chiefs.
Ben Bishop, NHL goalie, Tampa Bay Lightning
Cindy Blodgett, basketball player in the WNBA and former head women's basketball coach at the University of Maine
Jim Boylen, basketball assistant coach, Indiana Pacers
Mike Bordick, former Major League Baseball shortstop
D'Lo Brown (born Accie Conner), professional wrestler
Mike Buck, player for NFL's New Orleans Saints
Jack Capuano, NHL defenseman; coach of the New York Islanders
Rick Carlisle, NBA player, Dallas Mavericks coach (transferred to University of Virginia)
Stephen Cooper, linebacker, San Diego Chargers
Simon Danis-Pepin, player for AHL's Rockford IceHogs
Scott Darling, Goalie, won the 2014-15 Stanley Cup with the Chicago Blackhawks
Niko Dimitrakos, professional ice hockey player
Mike DeVito, defensive lineman, Kansas City Chiefs
Mike Dunham, former NHL player and Olympian (2002)
Mike Flynn, center, Baltimore Ravens
Barrett Heisten, ECHL player, Alaska Aces
Jimmy Howard, NHL goalie, Detroit Red Wings
Ben Hutton, defenseman Vancouver Canucks
Martin John, professional soccer player, full back, Cardiff City
Joe Johnson, baseball player for Atlanta Braves, Toronto Blue Jays
Paul Kariya, NHL player for St. Louis Blues, eldest Kariya brother
Steve Kariya, SEL player, Frölunda HC, middle brother of Paul and Martin
Martin Kariya, KHL player, Dinamo Riga, younger brother of Paul and Steve
Jack Leggett, baseball head coach, Clemson University
Mike Lundin, NHL player, Tampa Bay Lightning
Brandon McGowan, defensive back, New England Patriots
Kevin McMahan, wide receiver, 2006 Mr. Irrelevant
Carl "Stump" Merrill, former manager of the New York Yankees
Greg Moore, AHL player, Hartford Wolfpack
Matthew Mulligan, tight end, New England Patriots
Gustav Nyquist, NHL player, Detroit Red Wings
Montell Owens, NFL player, fullback, Jacksonville Jaguars
Bill Patrick, (AKA Gerard Monteux), NBC, Versus Network announcer and columnist
Dustin Penner, NHL player, Anaheim Ducks, Edmonton Oilers, Los Angeles Kings
Jeff Plympton, MLB, Boston Red Sox
Teddy Purcell, NHL winger, Edmonton Oilers
Viktoriya Rybalko, track-and-field long jumper
Irv Ray, MLB player, Boston Beaneaters, Baltimore Orioles
Devin Shore, Dallas Stars
Garth Snow, NHL player, Colorado Avalanche, Philadelphia Flyers, Vancouver Canucks, Pittsburgh Penguins, New York Islanders; general manager of Islanders
Daren Stone, safety, Atlanta Falcons, Dallas Cowboys, Baltimore Ravens
Justin Strzelczyk, offensive lineman, Pittsburgh Steelers
Mark Sweeney, Major League Baseball outfielder
Bill Swift, former Major League Baseball pitcher
Lofa Tatupu, former NFL player and Pro Bowl linebacker, Seattle Seahawks (transferred to University of Southern California)
Larry Thomas, former Major League Baseball player
Gary Thorne ESPN sports analyst and play-by-play announcer
John Tortorella, NHL head coach, Columbus Blue Jackets
Eric Weinrich, NHL player and 1988 USA Olympic hockey team member
The University of Maine operates the "University Volunteer Ambulance Corps," an Ambulance service licensed by the State of Maine. The service is operated by students and staff of the University. UVAC's ambulances are available to respond to emergencies on campus and also provide mutual aid to surrounding towns and agencies. The service ensures a licensed Emergency Medical Technician is sent on every call. The service has two ambulances both equipped to provide Paramedic Level care. UVAC responds to approximately 500 calls per school year.
