Tel Aviv University (TAU) (Hebrew: אוּנִיבֶרְסִיטַת תֵּל-אָבִיב Universitat Tel Aviv) is a public research university in the neighborhood of Ramat Aviv in Tel Aviv, Israel. With over 30,000 students, the University is the largest in the country.
Located in Tel Aviv, the University is the center of teaching and research of the city, comprising 9 faculties, 10 teaching hospitals, 27 schools, 98 departments and nearly 130 research institutes and centers.
TAU's origins date back to 1956, when three research institutes – the Tel Aviv School of Law and Economics (established in 1935), the Institute of Natural Sciences (established in 1931), and the Institute of Jewish Studies – joined together to form Tel Aviv University. Initially operated by the Tel Aviv municipality, the university was granted autonomy in 1963. The Ramat Aviv campus, covering an area of 170-acre (0.69 km2), was established that same year.
The university also maintains academic supervision over the Center for Technological Design in Holon, the New Academic College of Tel Aviv-Yaffo and the Afeka College of Engineering in Tel Aviv. The Wise Observatory is located in Mitzpe Ramon.
Faculties:
Katz Faculty of the Arts
Fleischman Faculty of Engineering
Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences
Entin Faculty of Humanities
Buchmann Faculty of Law
Wise Faculty of Life Sciences
Sackler Faculty of Medicine
Gordon Faculty of Social Sciences
Faculty of Management - Recanati Graduate School of Business Administration
Independent schools:
Porter School of Environmental Studies
Buchmann-Mehta School of Music
David Azrieli School of Architecture
Boaz School of Dental Medicine
Miller School of Education
Shapell School of Social Work
TAU International (formerly the School for Overseas Students)
Sagol School of Neuroscience
Institutes and centers:
A full list of Tel Aviv University's over 130 research institutes and centers is available here [2]
TAU International (formerly known as the School for Overseas Students) affords thousands of students from across the globe the opportunity to study at Tel Aviv University. All TAU International programs are conducted in English.
Programs include Semester or Year Abroad, Degree Programs, and Specialized Programs, such as the International LL.M at the Faculty of Law. Students in the Undergraduate or Semester Abroad Programs are given the option of housing at the Einstein Dorms, just outside the university.
Undergraduate programs:
B.S. in Electrical and Electronics Engineering via the International Engineering School
International B.A. degree in Liberal Arts and Humanities
Graduate programs:
In May 2007, New York University and Tel Aviv University approved a plan to establish an NYU Study Abroad Campus in Israel based at Tel Aviv University.
The Center for World University Rankings ranked Tel Aviv University 56th in the world and fourth in Israel in its 2012 CWUR World University Rankings.
The Times Higher Education World University Rankings for 2012 placed Tel Aviv University among the world's top 90 universities. The ratings reflect an overall measure of esteem that combines data on the institutions' reputation for research and teaching. This achievement positioned TAU on the same level as Brown University in Rhode Island and Leiden University in the Netherlands.
In 2013 QS World University Rankings ranked Tel Aviv University 196th in the world, making it the second-highest ranked university in Israel. Its subject rankings were: 202nd in Arts and Humanities, 295th in Engineering and Technology, 193rd in Life Sciences and Medicine, 208th in Natural Science, and 240th in Social Sciences and Management.
Tel Aviv University offers special programs of Jewish studies to teachers and students from the United States, France, Brazil, Argentina and Mexico. The programs are in English.
The Tel Aviv University Faculty of Law has exchange agreements with 35 overseas universities, including: University of Virginia, Cornell University, Boston University, UCLA, Bucerius (Germany), EBS (Germany), McGill (Canada), Osgoode Hall (Canada), Ottawa (Canada), Kuwait University (Kuwait),Umm al-Qura University (Saudi Arabia) Queens University (Queens), Toronto (Canada), Bergen (Norway), STL (China), KoGuan (China), Tsinghua (China), Jindal Global (India), University of Hong Kong, Singapore Management University, Stockholm University (Sweden), Monash (Australia), Sydney (Australia), Sciences Po (France), Seoul (South Korea), Lucern (Switzerland), Buenos Aires (Argentina), Bocconi (Italy)  and Madrid (Spain).
In 2013, Tel Aviv University and Ruppin Academic Center jointly created a study center at the Mediterranean Sea, where students will undertake advanced studies of issues impacting the coastal environment and its resources.
In Germany, Tel Aviv University cooperates with the Goethe-University in Frankfurt/Main. Both cities are linked by a long-lasting partnership agreement.
Notable faculty members (past and present) include:
Yakir Aharonov, physicist
Noga Alon, mathematician
Yitzhak Arad, historian
Karen Avraham, geneticist
Shlomo Ben-Ami, historian, former Minister of Foreign Affairs
Ziva Ben-Porat, literary theorist, writer, and editor
Joseph Bernstein, mathematician
Silvia Blumenfeld, curator of the fungi collection
Athalya Brenner, feminist Biblical scholar
Daniel Chamovitz, biologist
Guy Deutscher, physicist
Yoram Dinstein, international law Professor Emeritus and former president of Tel Aviv University
Uzi Even, chemist and political activist for LGBT rights
Israel Finkelstein, archaeologist
Yisrael Friedman, historian
Raphael E. Freundlich, Biblical studies and Latin
Ehud Gazit, nanotechnlogist, chief scientist - ministry of Science
Benjamin Isaac, historian
Joshua Jortner, physical chemist
Shoshana Kamin, mathematician
Aryeh Kasher, historian
Asa Kasher, philosopher and authority on Ethics, author of IDF's Code of Conduct
David S. Katz, historian
Shaul Ladany, industrial engineering
Fred Landman, semanticist
Zvi Laron, paediatric endocrinologist
Orna Lin, lawyer
Vitali Milman, mathematician
Moshé Mizrahi, Oscar-winning film director
Baruch Modan, oncologist
Yuval Ne'eman (1925–2006), physicist, former minister of Science and Technology
Abraham Nitzan, chemical physicist.
Kennedy Otieno, criminologist
Itamar Rabinovich, former Israeli ambassador to the United States and former president of Tel Aviv University
Aviad Raz, sociologist
Jacob Raz, East Asian studies
Tanya Reinhart (1943–2007), linguist
Amnon Rubinstein, former Dean of Law, also former Education minister
Ariel Rubinstein, economist
Pnina Salzman, pianist and piano pedagogue
Shlomo Sand, historian
Leon Schidlowsky, composer
Anita Shapira, historian
Micha Sharir, mathematician
Edna Shavit, drama
Joshua Sobol, playwright, writer, and director
Carlo Strenger psychologist, philosopher
Leonard Susskind, physicist
Boris Tsirelson, mathematician
Jacob Turkel, Israeli Supreme Court Justice
Lev Vaidman, physicist
Avi Weinroth, lawyer
Paul Wexler, linguist
George S. Wise, first President of the University (1963–1971)
Moshe Wolman, neuropathologist
Amotz Zahavi, biologist
Dan Ariely, author and academic
Boaz Miller, famed Wikipedia vigilante.
Fouad Awad, theatre director
Alon Bar, award-winning filmmaker
Daphne Barak Erez, current Supreme Court of Israel justice
Mohammad Barakeh, Knesset member and leader of Hadash
Rebecka Belldegrun (born 1950), ophthalmologist and businesswoman
Shlomo Ben-Ami, historian, former Minister of Foreign Affairs (Labor)
Yochai Benkler, Co-Director of the Berkman Center, Harvard Law School
Aluf Benn, Editor-in-Chief of Haaretz
Ran Cohen, former Minister of Housing (Meretz)
Arie Eldad, former Knesset member (National Union (Israel))
Israel Eliashiv, former Israeli Ambassador to Singapore
Nancy Ezer, author and Professor of Hebrew at UCLA
Yael S. Feldman, Abraham I. Katsh Professor of Hebrew Culture and Education and Professor of Hebrew and Judaic Studies at New York University
Ari Folman, cinematographer (Director of Waltz with Bashir)
Tal Friedman, comedian, actor and musician
Amir Gal-Or, founder of the Infinity Group
Benjamin Gantz, Chief of General Staff of the Israel Defense Forces.
Dan Gillerman, former Israeli Ambassador to the UN, and Vice-President of the 60th UN General Assembly
Tzachi Hanegbi, member of Knesset, former minister of Internal Security (Likud and Kadima)
Doron Kempel, CEO of SimpliVity
Michael Harris, academic
Avi Hasson, current Chief Scientist of the Ministry of Economy
Zvi Heifetz, former Israeli Ambassador to the United Kingdom
Ron Huldai, current mayor of Tel Aviv
Benjamin Isaac, historian
Moshe Kam, 49th President of IEEE and Dean of the Newark College of Engineering
Moshe Kaplinsky, Deputy Chief of the IDF General Staff
Efraim Karsh, historian
Rita Katz, terrorism analyst
Etgar Keret, writer
Dov Khenin, political scientist and Knesset member Hadash
Yosef Lapid, former Israeli vice premier, Minister of Justice and founder of the Shinui party
Keren Leibovitch, champion Paralympic swimmer
Hanoch Levin (1943–99), dramatist, theater director, author and poet
Uri Levine and Ehud Shabtai, co-founders of Waze
Amnon Lipkin-Shahak, former Israeli Chief of Staff and Minister of Tourism and Transportation
Moni Moshonov, actor and comedian
Yitzhak Mordechai, former Israeli Minister of Defense and Transportation
Abraham Nitzan, chemical physicist
Daniella Ohad Smith, design historian
Yitzhak Orpaz-Auerbach, author
Ophir Pines-Paz, former Interior Minister (Labor)
Gideon Raff, director and screenwriter, creator of the award-winning Israeli TV series Prisoners of War (TV series), adapted into Homeland (TV series)
Haim Ramon, former Minister of Health and Justice (Labor and Kadima)
Ilan Ramon (1954–2003), first Israeli astronaut
Daniel Reisner, former Head of the International Law Branch of the IDF Legal Division
Elie Rekhess, historian of the Israeli-Palestinian Conflict and faculty of Northwestern University
Gideon Sa'ar, Knesset member and Minister of Interior Affairs (Likud)
Simon Shaheen, musician
Silvan Shalom, former minister of Finance and Foreign Affairs (Likud)
Adi Shamir, cryptographer, co-inventor of the RSA cryptosystem
Ariel Sharon (1928-2014), former Prime Minister of Israel (Likud and Kadima)
Daniel Sivan, professor
Nahum Sonenberg, biochemist at McGill University
Yuval Tal, founder of Payoneer
Gadi Taub, historian, author, screenwriter, and political commentator
Natan Yonatan (1923–2004), poet
Poju Zabludowicz, billionaire, philanthropist, and owner of Tamares Group
Bat-Sheva Zeisler, singer and actress
Abdel Rahman Zuabi, former Supreme Court of Israel justice
Ghil'ad Zuckermann, linguist
Beth Hatefutsoth
List of universities in Israel
Tel Aviv
Tel-Aviv student film Festival
