Business administration is a term used to describe a set of activities necessary to maintain the level of operations within business organizations.
The administration of a business includes the performance or management of business operations and decision making, as well as the efficient organization of people and other resources, to direct activities toward common goals and objectives.
In general, administration refers to the broader management function, including the associated finance, personnel and MIS services.
In some analyses, management is viewed as a subset of administration, specifically associated with the technical and operational aspects of an organization, distinct from executive or strategic functions. Alternatively, administration can refer to the bureaucratic or operational performance of routine office tasks, usually internally oriented and reactive rather than proactive. Administrators, broadly speaking, engage in a common set of functions to meet the organization's goals. These "functions" of the administrator were described by Henri Fayol as "the five elements of administration". Sometimes creating output, which includes all of the processes that create the product that the business sells, is added as a sixth element. A business administrator oversees a business and its operations. His job is to ensure that the business meets its goals and is properly organized and managed. The tasks a person in this position has are both wide and varied, and often include ensuring that the right staff members are hired and properly trained, making plans for the business' success, and monitoring daily operations. When organizational changes are necessary, a person in this position usually leads the way as well. In some cases, the person who starts or owns the business serves as its administrator, but this is not always the case, as sometimes a company hires an individual for the job. When a person has the title of business administrator, he is essentially the manager of the company and its other managers. He oversees those in managerial positions to ensure that they follow company policies and work toward the company's goals in the most efficient manner. For example, he may work with the managers of the human resources, production, finance, accounting, and marketing departments to ensure that they function properly and are working inline with the company's goals and objectives. Additionally, he might interact with people outside the company, such as business partners and vendors.
Administration (law) (for administration of an insolvent)
Bachelor of Business Administration
Board of directors
Central administration
Chairman
Charitable organization
Chief executive officer
Chief administrative officer
Fundraising
Human resources
Master of Business Administration
Nonprofit organization
Private sector
Public administration
Public sector
White-collar worker
