Beef bourguignon US /ˌbiːf ˌbʊərɡᵻnˈjɔːn/ or bœuf bourguignon (UK /ˌbɜːrf ˈbʊərɡᵻnjɔːn/; French pronunciation: ​[bœf buʁ.ɡi.ɲɔ̃]), also called beef Burgundy, and bœuf à la Bourguignonne, is a well-known, traditional French recipe.
The dish originates from the Burgundy region (in French, Bourgogne) which is in the east of present-day France, as do many other dishes such as coq au vin, escargot, persillé ham, oeufs en meurette, gougères, pain d'épices, etc.
It is a stew prepared with beef braised in red wine, traditionally red Burgundy, and beef broth, generally flavoured with garlic, onions and a bouquet garni, with pearl onions and mushrooms added towards the end of cooking.
Traditionally, the meat was larded with lardons, but modern beef is sufficiently tender and well-marbled, so this very time-consuming technique is rarely used any more. However, bacon cut into small cubes is still used to produce the initial cooking fat and added to the dish at the end.
Beef bourguignon is one of many examples of peasant dishes being slowly refined into haute cuisine. Most likely, the particular method of slowly simmering the beef in wine originated as a means of tenderizing cuts of meat that would have been too tough to cook any other way.
Over time, the dish became a standard of French cuisine. The recipe most people still follow to make an authentic beef bourguignon was first described by Auguste Escoffier. That recipe, however, has undergone subtle changes, owing to changes in cooking equipment and available food supplies. Julia Child's Mastering the Art of French Cooking describes the dish, sauté de boeuf à la Bourguignonne, as "certainly one of the most delicious beef dishes concocted by man".
bœuf à la bourguignonne
bœuf bourguignon (Le Cordon Bleu Professional Cooking, Wayne Gisslen, Fifth Edition, 2003)
beef bourguignonne (spelling found for example in Food Lover's Companion, Sharon Tyler Herbst, Third Edition, 2001)
Lang, Jenifer Harvey, ed. (1988). "Beef". Larousse Gastronomique: The New American Edition of the World's Greatest Culinary Encyclopedia. New York: Crown Publishers. ISBN 0517570327. OCLC 777810992. 
