Pastilla (Besṭila), also transliterated bastilla, b'stilla or bstilla is a traditional Arabo-Andalusian Maghrebian dish.
The dish would have been one of the favorite dishes of the Sultan of Fes in Morocco. He would have asked a famous Spanish chef if he could make the dish Judhaba more delicious for his guests. Today, the dish Bastilla is the national dish of the city of Fes in Morocco.
The name of the pie comes from the Spanish word 'pastilla', meaning in modern Spanish either pill or "small pastry" after the transformation of the phoneme "p" into "b" that is specific to the Arabic language. It is an elaborate meat pie traditionally made of squab (fledgling pigeons). As squabs are often hard to get, shredded chicken is more often used today; pastilla can also use fish or offal as a filling. Pastilla is generally served as a starter at the beginning of special meals.
It is a pie which combines sweet and salty flavours; a combination of crisp layers of the crêpe-like werqa dough (a thinner cousin of the phyllo dough), savory meat slow-cooked in broth and spices and shredded, and a crunchy layer of toasted and ground almonds, cinnamon, and sugar.
The filling is made a day ahead, and is made by browning the meat pieces in oil. The pieces are then transferred to a bowl, and with the remaining oil, onions, water, parsley, and various spices are cooked. The liquid is then chilled, and after, thickened to form a custard-like sauce with beaten eggs. The flesh and skin from the bones is shredded and added to the sauce, and it is chilled overnight.
In a round pizza pan, the first dough layer is added, and butter brushed onto it. The cook adds the sauce over the dough, and places two more sheets on top. It is then baked, sprinked with confectioner's sugar and perhaps more cinnamon, and served.
In the traditional fassi cuisine, pastilla can also be served as a dessert, in which case, the pastilla is called Jowhara or Pastilla with milk. The pastilla is also made of warka and a milky cream put between the sheets. The Johara can also be flavored with orange flower water
Moroccan cuisine
List of Moroccan dishes
List of pies, tarts and flans
Andalusian cuisine
Arab cuisine
