Crème fraîche (English pronunciation : /ˌkrɛmˈfrɛʃ/, French pronunciation: ​[kʁɛm fʁɛːʃ], lit. "fresh cream") is a soured cream containing 10–45% butterfat and having a pH of around 4.5. It is soured with bacterial culture, but is less sour than U.S.-style sour cream, and has a lower viscosity and a higher fat content. European labeling regulation disallows any ingredients other than cream and bacterial culture.
The name "crème fraîche" is French, but similar soured creams are found in much of northern Europe.
In French-speaking countries, crème fraîche may refer to either the thick fermented product, crème fraîche épaisse or fermentée, or to liquid cream, crème fraîche liquide or fleurette. In these countries, crème fraîche without qualification normally refers to liquid cream, with the thick form usually called crème épaisse. In other countries, however, crème fraîche without qualification usually refers to the thick, fermented product.
Crème fraîche is produced by adding a starter culture to heavy cream, and allowing it to stand at appropriate temperature until thick. The culture is made up of a mix of bacteria including but not limited to Lactococcus species L. cremoris, L. lactis, and L. lactis biovar diacetylactis. This is what gives it the taste that distinguishes it from similar dairy products like sour cream.
In some places in Europe, the fat content of crème fraîche is regulated, and it may not contain ingredients other than cream and starter culture. In North America and the UK, products labeled "low-fat crème fraîche", with about 15% butterfat and with added stabilizers such as xanthan gum or maize/corn starch are commercialized. It is less stable when heated.
The crème fraîche from Normandy is famous, and the crème fraîche from a defined area around the town of Isigny-sur-Mer in the Calvados department of Normandy is highly regarded. It is the only cream to have an appellation d'origine contrôlée (AOC), which was awarded in 1986. It is also produced in many other parts of France, with large quantities coming from the major dairy regions of Brittany, Poitou-Charente, Lorraine and Champagne-Ardenne.
Crème fraîche is used both hot and cold in French cuisine. It is often used to finish hot savory sauces; with its fat content greater than 30%, curdling is not a problem. It is also the basis of many desserts and dessert sauces.
Crema Mexicana is a somewhat similar cultured sour cream. Smetana from Eastern Europe and Russia is very similar.
List of dairy products
List of fermented foods
