Fontina (French: Fontine) is an Italian cow's milk cheese. Although made throughout the year, the best cheese is obtained during the summer when the cows are moved to an altitude of 550 to 700 meters (1,800 to 2,300 feet) and fed only with rich grass to give it a distinctive aroma. Fontina has PDO status under European law.
Fontina cheese has been made in the Aosta Valley, in the Alps since the 12th century. It has a milk fat content around 45%. It can be identified by a Consorzio (Consortium) stamp of the Matterhorn including the script "FONTINA".
As with many other varieties, the name "Fontina" has been imposed upon by such derivatives as "Fontinella", "Fontal", and "Fontella". Although the version from Aosta Valley is the only original and the most famous, a derivative production occurs in other parts of Italy, as well as Denmark, Sweden, Quebec, France, Argentina, and the United States.
The original Fontina cheese from Aosta Valley is fairly pungent and has quite an intense flavor, although Fontina-like labeled cheeses that are produced in other countries can be much milder. The Swedish and Danish versions are often found in US grocery stores, and can be distinguished from Aostan Fontina by their red wax rind (also prevalent in Argentine Fontina). Aostan Fontina has a natural rind due to aging, which is usually tan to orange-brown.
It is noted for its earthy, mushroomy, and woody taste, and pairs exceptionally well with roast meats and truffles. It has a rich and creamy flavor which gets nuttier with aging.
The interior of the cheese is pale cream in color and riddled with holes known as "eyes". It has a fat content of 45%. A good accompaniment is Nebbiolo, a red wine with flavors of wild cherry and truffles.
Young Fontina has a softer texture (and can be suitable for fondue). Fonduta alla valdostana (in Italian) or Fondue à la valdôtaine (in French) is a traditional dish of Fontina whipped with milk, eggs, and truffles. Mature Fontina is a hard cheese. Fontina has a mild, somewhat nutty flavor, while rich, herbaceous and fruity. It melts well.
Fontina produced in the Aosta Valley must be made from unpasteurized milk from a single milking, with two batches being made per day.
