Bread pudding is a bread-based dessert popular in many countries' cuisines, including Argentina, Colombia, Belgium, Canada, Cuba, France, Germany, Ireland, Malta, Mexico, the Netherlands, Slovakia, the Philippines, Puerto Rico, India (Double ka Meetha), the United Kingdom, and the United States. In other languages, its name is a translation of "bread pudding" or even just "pudding", for example "pudín" or "budín" in Spanish; also in Spanish another name is "migas" (crumbs). In the Philippines, banana bread pudding is popular. In Mexico, there is a similar dish eaten during Lent called capirotada.
Bread pudding is made with stale bread and milk or cream, generally containing eggs, a form of fat such as oil, butter or suet, and depending on whether the pudding is sweet or savory, a variety of other ingredients. Sweet bread puddings may use sugar, syrup, honey, dried fruit, as well as spices such as cinnamon, nutmeg, mace, or vanilla. The bread is soaked in the liquids, mixed with the other ingredients, and baked.
Savory puddings may be served as main courses, while sweet puddings are typically eaten as desserts.
In Belgium, particularly Brussels, it is baked with brown sugar, cinnamon, old bread, and raisins or apple.
In Canada, bread pudding is sometimes made with maple syrup.
In Hong Kong, bread pudding is usually served with vanilla cream dressing.
In Hungary it is called 'Máglyarakás' which is baked with whipped egg whites on top of it.
In Malaysia, bread pudding is eaten with custard sauce.
In Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany, black bread is used to make "black bread pudding" (Schwarzbrotpudding).
In Puerto Rico, bread pudding is soaked over night in coconut milk and served with a guava rum sauce.
In the United States, especially Louisiana, bread puddings are typically sweet and served as dessert with a sweet sauce of some sort, such as whiskey sauce, rum sauce, or caramel sauce, but typically sprinkled with sugar and eaten warm in squares or slices. Sometimes bread pudding is served warm topped with or alongside a dollop of whipped cream or a scoop of vanilla ice cream.
In Panama, bread pudding is known as "mamallena".
In Aruba, bread pudding is known as "pan bolo".
Bread and butter pudding
Ekmek kadayıfı
Hasty pudding
Cabinet pudding
List of bread dishes
Pain à la grecque
