Vindaloo (also known as vindallo, vindalho, or vindaalo) is an Indian curry dish popular in the region of Goa, the surrounding Konkan, and many other parts of India. The cuisine of the Bombay region (Maharashtrian cuisine) also includes a variation of the dish. However, it is known globally in its Anglo-Indian form as a staple of curry house menus, often regarded as a fiery spicy dish, though it is not necessarily the spiciest dish available.
A "vindaloo" is a standard element of Indian cuisine, derived from the Portuguese carne de vinha d'alhos (Literally: Meat in garlic wine marinade), a dish of meat (usually pork) marinated in wine and garlic. In its basic structure, it was the Portuguese sailor's 'preserved' raw ingredients, packed in wooden barrels of alternate layers of pork and garlic, and soaked in wine. This was 'Indianized' by the local Goan cooks, by the substitution of palm vinegar for the red wine and the addition of dried 'red' chili peppers with additional spices to evolve into the local and easy to pronounce "vindaloo". Nowadays, the Anglo-Indian version of a vindaloo is marinated in vinegar, sugar, fresh ginger, and spices overnight, then cooked with the addition of further spices.
Restaurants in Goa offering traditional Goan cuisine, serve vindaloo with pork, its original recipe. The dish was popularized by Goan cooks (whom the British favoured because they had no issues in kitchen and bars with the handling of beef, pork or liquor) in the British establishments and the ocean-going liners. This dish is still available on the P&O liners, in its original 'Pork vindaloo' form. However, restaurants outside Goa serve vindaloo with chicken or lamb, which is sometimes mixed with cubed potatoes. Even though the word aloo (आलू) does mean "potato" in Hindi, traditional vindaloo does not include potatoes.
Vindaloo has gained popularity outside of India, where it is almost universally featured on Indian restaurant menus. Vindaloo served in western restaurants differs from the original dish of that name, as it is simply a spicier version of the standard "medium" restaurant curry, with the addition of vinegar, potatoes and chili peppers. Despite its origins, vindaloo in Britain is usually not served with pork, rather mostly with chicken, beef, lamb, mutton, or prawn. The fact is that in the UK especially, it is found in restaurants run by Bangladeshi Muslims, who do not handle pork, and have substituted it with an assortment of its basic ingredient, while even leaving out the original pork and vinegar.
Vindaloo is one of the spiciest dishes available on the menu where it is served, although some serve a tindaloo, which is a completely different dish that originated in Bangladesh. The Bengali "tindaloo" is a step up from vindaloo in terms of spiciness, with the addition of more chillies. Another spicy curry is the phall. These two dishes are sometimes omitted from the menu, because they are regarded as too spicy for the majority of diners, but can be prepared by special request.
