Kubota Corporation (株式会社クボタ, Kabushiki-kaisha Kubota) is a tractor and heavy equipment manufacturer based in Osaka, Japan. One of its notable contributions was to the construction of the Solar Ark. The company was established in 1890.
The company produces many products including tractors and agricultural equipment, engines, construction equipment, vending machines, pipe, valves, cast metal, pumps and equipment for water purification, sewage treatment and air conditioning.
The company is listed on the first section of Tokyo Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the TOPIX 100 and Nikkei 225
In 1969, Kubota began exporting its 21 horsepower (16 kW) L200 compact tractors to the United States. Because of the initial success in the American marketplace, the Kubota Tractor Corporation was formed in Torrance, California in 1972. Kubota also owns other similar tractor companies in many countries including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Poland, Spain, and the United Kingdom.
In 1988, Kubota opened its first manufacturing facility, Kubota Manufacturing of America, in Gainesville, GA (USA) for the production of front end loader and backhoe implements for Kubota tractors. Later, other products were added including an array of lawn and garden tractors and utility vehicles.
In 2006, the aforementioned front end loader and backhoe production was transferred from KMA to a new manufacturing facility, Kubota Industrial Equipment, near Jefferson, GA (USA). This facility also prepares/configures the larger (B, L & M-series) tractors from Japan for delivery to KTC's central, northern and southeast division (region) dealerships.
Due to an increased demand for its compact industrial engines, Kubota Engine America Corporation was formed in 1999 in Lincolnshire, IL as a subsidiary company of Kubota Corporation - Osaka.
The current KEA was a division of Kubota Tractor Corp. from 1982 to 1999 prior to becoming a subsidiary of Kubota Corp. Kubota Engine America Corporation sells its Emission Certified Diesel and Spark ignited engines from 6 to 110 hp in the U.S., Canada and Central/South America. Kubota Engine America Corporation also sells a line of Diesel generators from 7 to 35 KW.
In the mid-1980s Kubota, looking for new opportunities, provided funding for Ardent Computer Corporation, an American company that produced graphics minicomputers based on the MIPS architecture. After a merger and series of flops, control of the company was ceded to Kubota and was renamed Kubota Pacific and later Kubota Graphics Company. However, the company still wasn't very successful and was finally shut down in 1994.
A joint venture between Kubota Corporation and Siam Cement, Siam Kubota was established on August 2, 2010 at 3.114 billion Thai baht capital with the goal of becoming a leader in the development of agricultural production machines in Asia.
Kubota Spears - a rugby team that plays in the Top League
