The Leonberger is a giant dog breed. The breed's name derives from the city of Leonberg in Baden-Württemberg, Germany. According to legend, the Leonberger was ostensibly bred as a 'symbolic dog' that would mimic the lion in the town crest. It is in the Working Group for dog shows such as Crufts, but not at the World Dog Show.
This Mountain dog comes with a generous double coat; the Leonberger is a large, muscular, and elegant dog with balanced body type, medium temperament, and dramatic presence. The head is adorned with a striking black mask, and projects the breed's distinct expression of intelligence, pride, and kindliness. Remaining true to their early roots as a capable family and working dog and search and rescue dog (particularly water), the surprisingly agile Leonberger is sound and coordinated, with both strength in bearing and elegance in movement. A dimorphic breed, the Leonberger possesses either a strongly masculine or elegantly feminine form, making gender immediately discernible.
Height at withers:
Male: 28–31.5 in (71–80 cm) — average 29.5 in (75 cm) 
Female: 25.5–29.5 in (65–75 cm) — average 27.5 in (70 cm) 
Weight:
Males: 120–170 lb (54–77 kg) — average 140–150 lb (64–68 kg)
Females: 100–135 lb (45–61 kg) — average 115 lb (52 kg)
For a mature Leonberger, the height at the withers is ideally the median of the breed's range— 28 to 31.5 inches (71 to 80 cm) for males and 25.5 to 29.5 inches (65 to 75 cm) for females. Capable of demanding work, the Leonberger is a dog of ample substance. Its frame is supported with well-muscled, medium to heavy bone in direct proportion to its size. A roomy chest is sufficiently broad and deep for the purpose of work. Seen in profile, the chest curves inward from the pro-sternum, tangently joins the elbow to its underline at fifty percent of the withers' height and then continues slightly upward toward the stifle.
The head is well balanced in proportion to the size of the dog and is deeper than broad with the length of muzzle and the length of skull approximately equal. With close fitting eyelids, the eyes are set into the skull upon a slight oblique; the eyes are medium-sized, almond shaped, and colored dark brown. The ears are fleshy, moderately sized, and pendant shaped, with sufficient substance to hang close to the skull and drop the tip of the ears level with the inside corners of the mouth. The Leonberger's ears rise from halfway between the eye and the top of his skull to level with the top of his skull. Though level bites and slight anomalies not affecting the robustness of the lower jaw are common, the ideal Leonberger capably possesses a strong scissor bite with full dentition.
Both a necessity for work and a defining attribute of the breed, the Leonberger has a water resistant double coat on his body that is complemented by the shorter, fine hair on his muzzle and limbs. The long, profuse, outer coat is durable, relatively straight, lies flat, and fits close. Mature, masculine Leonbergers exhibit a pronounced mane. Similarly, his tail is very well furnished from the tip to the base where it blends harmoniously with the breech's furnishings. Climate permitting, his undercoat is soft and dense. Apart from a neatening of the feet, the Leonberger is presented untrimmed.
A variety of coat colours are acceptable, including all combinations of lion-yellow, red, red-brown, and sand. Nose leather, foot pads and lips should always be black. Faulty colours include brown with brown nose leather, black and tan, black, white or silver and eyes without any brown. A small patch of white on the chest or toes is permitted.
First and foremost a family dog, the Leonberger's temperament is one of its most important and distinguishing characteristics. Well socialized and trained, the Leonberger is self-assured, insensitive to noise, submissive to family members, friendly toward children, well composed with passersby, and self-disciplined when obliging its family or property with protection. Robust, loyal, intelligent, playful, and kindly, they can thus be taken anywhere without difficulty and adjust easily to a variety of circumstances, including the introduction of other dogs.
Leonbergers are strong, generally healthy dogs. Hip dysplasia, which devastates many large breeds, is largely controlled because of the effort of many breeders who actively screen their Leonbergers using x-rays evaluated by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals and leave dysplastic specimens out of the gene pool, thereby reducing the risk of bone/joint problems. For over twenty years, breeders belonging to the Leonberger Club of America, which issued pedigrees for the Leonberger breed in America, adhered to many aspects of the German breeding program whereby member kennels may only choose to breed dogs that were certified as three generation free of hip dysplasia. As a likely result, the incidence of hip dysplasia in the breed was reduced to almost 10% and the occurrence of OFA rated "Excellent" hips increased by over 60% in just twenty years. Current incidence rates of hip dysplasia in Leonbergers are likely around 13%. After 2010, when the Leonberger Club of America joined the American Kennel Club, the formerly strict breeding rules are no longer mandatory for all Leonbergers.
To breed the healthiest Leonberger litter, we must look closely at their ancestor’s health. This is done by looking at a pedigree, which is a family tree of genetics. In this model we are looking at three different pedigrees, the soon to be mother, Luna, and the two potential fathers, Kane and Leo. We are looking for the lowest percentage of genetic disease because then the puppies will have a lower chance of having serious health problems caused by these genetic diseases.
The specific disease that is examined is the LPN mutation. This mutation affects the muscular and nervous system of the dog and can progress to the point where they are not able to support their own weight and can lose the ability to walk. In the model, Leo had lower percentages for both the LPN1 gene mutation, LPN2 gene mutation. That means that there is a lower chance that this mutation would be passed down to the litter, making him the best choice as the father because the puppies would most likely be the healthiest.
Another important thing to consider is the CIO genetic percentages. These percentages show the similarities of the genetics of the dog through two categories, CIO All Gen. and CIO 10 Gen. CIO All Gen. is the percentage of genetics of the dog that are similar to the whole Leonberger breed. CIO 10 Gen. is the percentage of genetics of the dog that are similar to the past ten generations of the dog’s pedigree. These results were extremely close but Leo had lower percentages for both CIO All Gen. and CIO 10 Gen., making her the better choice.
The motivation of the model is to show that safe breeding must be practiced to keep the Leonberger population healthy. Even when safe breeding is practiced, breeding is still beneficial and should be practiced by all Leonberger breeders. Another motivation of the model is that learning and using these practices is possible for every breeder due to the number of resources and tools from Leonberger clubs around the world as well as the Leonberger databases.
The percent of LPN1 and LPN2 were found in the pedigree and divided by how many of the dogs in that generation had the mutation. Each of the LPN percentages was then multiplied by the corresponding percentage of DNA that would be passed down to the litter and then added together to get the percent of genes that would be passed down to the litter for LPN1 and LPN2. 
Though not common, Leonbergers do inherit and/or develop a number of diseases that range in their impact from mild to devastating. In addition to hip dysplasia, Leonbergers can inherit and/or develop heart problems, Inherited Leonberger Paralysis/Polyneuropathy (ILPN), osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, Osteochondrosis Dissecans, allergies, digestive disorders, cataracts, entropion/ectropion eyelids, progressive retinal atrophy (PRA), perianal fistulas, and thyroid disorders. Though rumors persist of Leonbergers being more sensitive to anesthesia than other breeds of dog, they are largely untrue. Leonbergers, like other large breed dogs, require less dosage per pound of sedative than smaller breeds to yield the same effect. The Leonberger Health Foundation, a private nonprofit foundation whose sole mission is to support major researchers who are seeking to identify genetic markers for serious diseases which affect the breed, is currently focusing on osteosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, and Leonberger Polyneuropathy.
Leonbergers in UK and USA/Canada surveys had a median lifespan of about 7 years, which is about 4 years less than the average purebred dog, but typical of similarly sized breeds. About 20% of Leonbergers in the surveys lived to 10 years or more. The oldest dogs in both surveys died at about 13. In France, the breed has a median lifespan of 8.75 years.
Serious diseases can affect the Leonberger—certain types of cancers are very common in the breed. Gastric Dilatation Volvulus, commonly called bloat, is another serious condition that affects many of the large and giant breed dogs, particularly those with deep chests. It causes the stomach to twist and can be fatal quite quickly. Adult Leonbergers should always be fed twice a day rather than one large meal in order to reduce the likelihood of bloat. Leonbergers are not alone in inheriting serious diseases and according to the University of Sydney's LIDA taskforce, Leonbergers have relatively few health issues compared to other dog breeds.
In a 2004 UK Kennel Club survey, the most common causes of death were cancer (45%), cardiac (11%), and "unknown" (8.5%). In a 2000 USA/Canada Leonberger Club of America survey, the most common causes of death were cancer (37%), old age (12%), cardiac (9%), and "sudden death" (8%).
Studies have indicated problems with inherited polyneuropathy in certain populations of Leonbergers and cataracts in dogs in the United Kingdom. A study of "Leonberger polyneuropathy" was published in 2014. Genetic testing is to be done through a protocol administered in North America by the University of Minnesota Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory. or Institute of Genetics, Vetsuisse Faculty, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland
In the 1830s, Heinrich Essig, a dog breeder and seller and mayor of the town of Leonberg near Stuttgart in Baden-Württemberg, Germany, claimed to have created the Leonberger by crossing a female Landseer Newfoundland with a "barry" male from the Great St. Bernard Hospice and Monastery (which would later create the Saint Bernard breed). Later, according to Essig, a Pyrenean Mountain Dog was added, resulting in very large dogs with the long white coats that were the fashion for the time, and pleasant temperament. The first dogs registered as Leonbergers were born in 1846 and had many of the prized qualities of the breeds from which they were derived. The popular legend is that it was bred to resemble the coat-of-arms animal of Leonberg, the lion. The Leonberger dog became popular with several European royal households, including Napoleon II, Empress Elizabeth of Austria-Hungary, the Prince of Wales, Otto Von Bismarck, Emperor Napoleon III and Umberto I of Italy. Essig's claim of breeding the dog as described is disputed. At least as early as 1585, the royal household of Austrian Prince Franz Metternich, of Wolfberg, father of Prince Metternich, owned dogs of the same description. Either way, there is no doubt that Essig named and registered the breed first. A black and white engraving of the Leonberger was included in "The Illustrated Book of the Dog" by Vero Shaw (at p. 488) in 1881. At the time, Essig's Leonbergers were denounced as an indifferent knockoff of a St. Bernard — not a stable and recognized breed — and a product of a popular fad or fashion for large and strong dogs, fomented in part by Essig's prodigious marketing skills (he gave dogs to the rich and famous).
The modern look of the Leonberger, with darker coats and a black masks, was developed during the latter part of the 20th century by re-introducing other breeds, such as the Newfoundland. This was necessary because breeding stocks of the leonberger were seriously affected by the two world wars. During World War I most Leonbergers were left to fend for themselves as breeders fled or were killed. Reportedly, only five Leonbergers survived World War I and were bred until World War II when, again, almost all Leonbergers were lost. During the two world wars, Leonbergers were used to pull the ammunition carts, a service to the breed's country that resulted in the Leonbergers' near-destruction. Leonbergers today can have their ancestry traced to the eight dogs that survived World War II.
Traditionally, Leonbergers were kept as farm dogs and were much praised for their abilities in watch and draft work. They were frequently seen pulling carts around the villages of Bavaria and surrounding districts. Around the beginning of the 20th Century, Leonbergers were imported by the Government of Canada for use as water rescue/lifesaving dogs. The breed continues in that role today, along with the Newfoundland, Labrador Retriever and Golden Retriever dogs; they are used at the Italian School of Canine Lifeguard.
The Leonberger received American Kennel Club recognition as a member of the Working Group on January 1, 2010, alongside the Icelandic Sheepdog and the Cane Corso. It was the 167th breed to be recognized by the AKC.
Three Leonberger dogs (one was a female, and two males) played the main character Buck in The Call of the Wild: Dog of the Yukon (1997), a Canadian rendition of Jack London's Call of the Wild which stars Rutger Hauer as John Thornton and is narrated by Richard Dreyfuss. The breed chosen in this movie was not the one identified as Buck in the novel.
The breed has been featured on stamps from many countries.
The Lifetime MADE-FOR-TV movie Grumpy Cat's Worst Christmas Ever features a Leonberger who becomes a victim of a kidnapping.
"The Leonberger: A special supplement". The New Zealand Kennel Gazette 36 (3). April 1996. 
Gustafson-Eskner, Margareta; Rogert, Ulrika (1996). Leonbergerboken (in Swedish). 
Kuntová, Daniela (1994). Leonberger (in Czech) 37. Komenshého, Czech Republic: Dona Press. p. 370. ISBN 80-900080-2-X. 
Lusby, Madeline; Trafford, Michael (Photographer) (2005). Leonberger (Comprehensive Owners Guide (Hardcover). City: Kennel Club Books. ISBN 1-59378-314-0. EAN 9781593783143. 
Muller, Ton (1994). Het houden van een Leonberger, een praktijkboek (in Dutch). The Netherlands. 
Perosino, Guido (1993). The Leonberger. Milano: Giovanni De Vecchi. 
Pfaumer, Sharon. (July 1996) "The Leonberger, the golden-hearted lion dog." in Dog World (USA), pp. 14–22.
Rahmer, Larry. The History of the Leonberger in Great Britain. 
Schmitt, Hannelie; Zerl, Gerhard (1996). Der Leonberger (in German) (revised ed.). Veriagsgesellschaft: Rudolf Muller, Koln-Braunsfeld. 
Shaw, Vero (1881). Leonberg Dog. The Illustrated Book of The Dog (London, Paris, New York: Cassel, Petter, Galpin & Company). pp. 479–480, 488–494. Retrieved March 31, 2014.  at Internet Archive
Stramer, Metha. The Dog of Leonberg, The History of a Dog Breed Multilingual (English, German, French, Dutch) trilogy on the history of the Leonberger dog (1846-1948) (Independent Leo Gazette) ISBN 978-90-813426-1-2.
White, Angela (12 Feb 1998). The Leonberger. The World of Dogs ((Hardcover) (Kingdom Books, Havant). pp. 208 pages. ISBN 1-85279-064-4. ISBN 978-1-85279-064-6. 
