Wilkinson's catalyst is the common name for chloridotris(triphenylphosphane)rhodium(I), a coordination compound with the formula RhCl(PPh3)3 (Ph = phenyl). It is named after the chemist and Nobel Laureate, Sir Geoffrey Wilkinson, who popularized its use.
The compound is a square planar, 16-electron complex. It is usually obtained in the form of a red-violet crystalline solid from the reaction of rhodium(III) chloride hydrate with excess triphenylphosphine. The synthesis is conducted in refluxing ethanol which helps with the reduction. Triphenylphosphine serves as the reducing agent yielding triphenylphosphine oxide.
RhCl3(H2O)3 + 4 PPh3 → RhCl(PPh3)3 + OPPh3 + 2 HCl + 2 H2O
Wilkinson's catalyst catalyzes the hydrogenation of alkenes. The mechanism of this reaction involves the initial dissociation of one or two triphenylphosphine ligands to give 14- or 12-electron complexes, respectively, followed by oxidative addition of H2 to the metal. Subsequent π-complexation of alkene, intramolecular hydride transfer (olefin insertion), and reductive elimination results in extrusion of the alkane product, e.g.:
Other applications of Wilkinson's catalyst includes the catalytic hydroboration of alkenes with catecholborane and pinacolborane, and the selective 1,4-reduction of α,β-unsaturated carbonyl compounds in concert with triethylsilane. When the triphenylphosphine ligands are replaced by chiral phosphines (e.g., Chiraphos, DIPAMP, DIOP), the catalyst becomes chiral and converts prochiral alkenes into enantiomerically enriched alkanes via the process called asymmetric hydrogenation.
RhCl(PPh3)3 reacts with CO to give trans-RhCl(CO)(PPh3)2, which is structurally analogous to Vaska's complex (but much less reactive). The same complex arises from the decarbonylation of aldehydes:
RhCl(PPh3)3 + RCHO → RhCl(CO)(PPh3)2 + RH + PPh3
Upon stirring in benzene solution, RhCl(PPh3)3 converts to the poorly soluble red-colored species [RhCl(PPh3)2]2. This conversion further demonstrates the lability of the triphenylphosphine ligands.
The addition of a Barton's base such as 2-tert-butyl-1,1,3,3-tetramethylguanidine poses dramatic implications on the classic Rh(III)-mediated pathway of hydrogenations with Wilkinson's catalyst and H2. Following the customary initial oxidative addition, a barrierless reductive elimination of HCl from the traditional Rh(III)–H2 intermediates instantly produces remarkably reactive Rh(I)–H species. This mechanistic event translates into a notable boost on the performance of Wilkinson's catalyst on the hydrogenation of several alkenes and internal alkynes.
Rhodium-catalyzed hydrogenation
