Fédération Cynologique Internationale (English: World Canine Organization) is an international federation of kennel clubs based in Thuin, Belgium.
Its goals are described in Article 2 of their regulations:
The aims of the F.C.I. are to encourage and promote breeding and use of purebred dogs whose functional health and physical features meet the standard set for each respective breed and which are capable of working and accomplishing functions in accordance with the specific characteristics of their breed; to protect the use, keeping and breeding of dogs in the member countries; to support free exchange of dogs and cynological information between member countries and initiate the organization of exhibitions and tests.
The FCI was founded in 1911 by Germany, Austria, Belgium, France and the Netherlands. The Société Centrale Canine de France and the Société Royale Saint-Hubert in Belgium recreated the FCI in 1921 since it had disappeared in World War I.
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale has 84 member countries as of May 2008, with one member per country. Each member country regulates its own breed clubs and stud books, and trains its own judges; the Fédération Cynologique Internationale acts as an international coordinating body, making sure that pedigrees and judges are internationally recognized. In addition, the Fédération Cynologique Internationale sponsors and regulates the World Dog Show and international dog shows. The Fédération Cynologique Internationale is not connected to any other dog club or body that also uses the acronym "FCI".
Currently the FCI has recognized 332 fully officional breeds and 11 provisional breeds. The latest addition to the new breeds was the Miniature Bull Terrier, which had earlier been considered by the FCI as another of the two variations of the Bull Terrier. The newest breed on the list which has not been accepted by the FCI before as a variation is the Thai Bangkaew Dog, recognized on the provisional basis in 2011. The two newest breeds on the fully accepted breed's list are the Berger Blanc Suisse and the Perro de Presa Canario.
All breeds are divided into 10 groups. These groups are based on different issues such as appearance or use. The 10 groups are:
Sheepdogs and Cattle Dogs (except Swiss Cattle Dogs)
Pinscher and Schnauzer - Molossoid Breeds - Swiss Mountain and Cattle Dogs and Other Breeds
Terriers
Dachshunds
Spitz and Primitive Types
Scenthounds and Related Breeds
Pointers and Setters
Retrievers - Flushing Dogs - Water Dogs
Companion and Toy Dogs
Sighthounds
Each group has different sections for different subgroups of dog breeds. In these sections the breeds are arranged in alphabetical order of their owner countries.
Each breed has its own breed number. This ensures that a specific breed can be correctly identified, because each breed might have different names in different countries or languages, and the names of many different breeds are similar to each other.
For example, the Norwegian Buhund is in Group 5 (Spitz and Primitive Types), Section 3 (Nordic Watchdogs and Herders), and is overall breed number 237.
The FCI informs about the shows and working trials held in each member country. The results are sent to the office in Belgium.
The FCI also sanctions world championship shows, including the World Dog Show, in various categories, including conformation, dog agility, obedience, sighthound racing, field trials, and others.
