The large bird genus Columba comprises a group of medium to large stout-bodied pigeons, often referred to as the typical pigeons. The terms "dove" and "pigeon" are used indiscriminately for smaller and larger Columbidae, respectively. Columba species – at least those of Columba sensu stricto – are generally termed "pigeons", and in many cases wood-pigeons. The species commonly referred to just as "the pigeon" is the feral pigeon (C. livia domestica). It is derived from the rock pigeon (C. livia), which also has given rise to the majority of domesticated pigeon breeds, such as the racing pigeon. Meanwhile, "wood pigeon" by itself usually means the common wood pigeon (C. palumbus).
This genus as understood today is native to the Old World, but some – notably the domestic and feral rock pigeon – have been introduced outside their natural range, for example in the Americas.
The term columba comes from the Latin columba, "a dove", the feminine form of columbus, "a male dove", itself the latinisation of the Greek κόλυμβος (kolumbos), "diver", which derives from the verb κολυμβάω (kolumbaō), "to dive, plunge headlong, swim". The feminine form of kolumbos, κολυμβίς (kolumbis), "diver", was the name applied by Aristophanes and others to the common rock pigeons of Greece, because of the "swimming" motion made by their wings when flying.
The American pigeons formerly in Columba are now split off as a separate genus Patagioenas again. That the American radiation constitutes a distinct lineage is borne out by molecular evidence; in fact, the Patagioenas "pigeons" are basal to the split between the Columba "pigeons" and the Streptopelia "doves". The typical pigeons together with Streptopelia and the minor Nesoenas and Stigmatopelia lineages constitute the dominant evolutionary radiation of Columbidae in temperate Eurasia, though they also occur in tropical regions. The taxonomic status of some African pigeons presently placed here is in need of further study; they are smaller than the usual Columba (and hence often called "doves"), and differ in some other aspects. They might be separable as genus Aplopelia. That notwithstanding, the lineage of the typical pigeons probably diverged from its closest relatives in the Late Miocene, perhaps some 7-8 million years ago (Ma).
Species remaining in Columba are:
Rock pigeon, Columba livia
Domestic and feral pigeons, Columba livia domestica
Stock dove, Columba oenas
Trocaz pigeon, Columba trocaz
Bolle's pigeon, Columba bollii
Laurel pigeon, Columba junoniae
Hill pigeon, Columba rupestris
Snow pigeon, Columba leuconota
Speckled pigeon, Columba guinea
White-collared pigeon, Columba albitorques
Yellow-eyed pigeon, Columba eversmanni
Somali pigeon, Columba oliviae
Common wood pigeon or wood pigeon, Columba palumbus
Madeiran wood pigeon, Columba palumbus maderensis – extinct (early 20th century)
Afep pigeon, Columba unicincta
African olive pigeon, Columba arquatrix
Cameroon olive pigeon, Columba sjostedti
São Tomé olive pigeon, Columba thomensis
Comoros olive pigeon, Columba polleni
Speckled wood pigeon, Columba hodgsonii
White-naped pigeon, Columba albinucha
Ashy wood pigeon, Columba pulchricollis
Nilgiri wood pigeon, Columba elphinstonii
Sri Lanka wood pigeon, Columba torringtoniae
Pale-capped pigeon, Columba punicea
Silvery pigeon, Columba argentina – (thought to be extinct, rediscovered in 2008)
Andaman wood pigeon, Columba palumboides
Japanese wood pigeon, Columba janthina
Ogasawara wood pigeon, Columba janthina nitens – extinct (1980s)
Bonin wood pigeon, Columba versicolor – extinct (c.1890)
Ryukyu wood pigeon, Columba jouyi – extinct (late 1930s)
Metallic pigeon or white-throated pigeon, Columba vitiensis
Lord Howe metallic pigeon, Columba vitiensis godmanae – extinct (1853)
Tongan metallic pigeon, Columba vitiensis ssp. – extinct (late 18th century); validity doubtful
White-headed pigeon, Columba leucomela
Yellow-legged pigeon, Columba pallidiceps
Eastern bronze-naped pigeon, Columba delegorguei
Western bronze-naped pigeon, Columba iriditorques
Island bronze-naped pigeon, Columba malherbii
Lemon dove, Columba larvata – sometimes placed in Aplopelia
São Tomé lemon dove, Columba (larvata) simplex – sometimes placed in Aplopelia
Mauritian wood pigeon, Columba thiriouxi – extinct
A fossil species, C. omnisanctorum, was described from the Early Pliocene (5.3-3.6 Ma) of the Gargano Peninsula and surroundings, Italy. A supposed "falcon" fossil from nearby contemporary and Middle Pliocene (3.6-2.6 Ma) sites may either be of the same species or another pigeon; the name Columba pisana would apply for it or (if conspecific) for both. C. melitensis is a fossil pigeon from the Late Pleistocene of Malta. Only known from a coracoid described by Richard Lydekker in 1891, whether it is indeed distinct from the living species and not just a paleosubspecies needs to be studied, given its late age. Indeterminate remains of a Columba were also found in Late Pliocene/Early Pleistocene (ELMMZ MN 17) deposits at Varshets (Bulgaria) and Šandalja (Croatia).
Another prehistoric pigeon, C. congi, was described from Early Pleistocene remains found in the famous Zhoukoudian caves in China. This, too, needs to be studied regarding whether it is not just an ancestral population of a still-living species.
