Marketing mix is a business tool used in marketing and by marketers. The marketing mix is often crucial when determining a product or brand's offer, and is often associated with the four Ps: price, product, promotion, and place. In service marketing, however, the four Ps are expanded to the seven Ps or Seven Ps to address the different nature of services.
In the 1990s, the concept of four C's was introduced as a more customer-driven replacement of the four P's. There are two theories based on four Cs: Lauterborn's four Cs (consumer, cost, communication, convenience), and Shimizu's four Cs (commodity, cost, communication, channel).
In 2012, a new four P's theory was proposed with people, processes, programs, and performance.
The marketer E. Jerome McCarthy proposed a four Ps classification in 1960, which has since been widely used by marketers.
The "seven Ps" is a marketing model that adds to the aforementioned four Ps, including "physical evidence", "people", and "process": It is used when the relevant product is a service, not merely a physical good.
Robert F. Lauterborn proposed a four Cs classification in 1990 which is a more consumer-orientated version of the four Ps that attempts to better fit the movement from mass marketing to niche marketing:
After Koichi Shimizu proposed a four Cs classification in 1973, it was expanded to the 7Cs Compass Model to provide a more complete picture of the nature of marketing in 1979. It attempts to explain the success or failure of a firm within a market and is somewhat analogous to Michael Porter's diamond model, which tries to explain the success and failure of different countries economically.
The 7Cs Compass Model comprises:
(C1) Corporation – The core of four Cs is corporation (company and non profit organization). C-O-S (organization, competitor, stakeholder) within the corporation. The company has to think of compliance and accountability as important. The competition in the areas in which the company competes with other firms in its industry.
The four elements in the 7Cs Compass Model are:
A formal approach to this customer-focused marketing mix is known as "Four Cs" (commodity, cost, communication, channel) in the Seven Cs Compass Model. The four Cs model provides a demand/customer centric version alternative to the well-known four Ps supply side model (product, price, promotion, place) of marketing management.
Product → Commodity
Price → Cost
Promotion → Communication
Place → Channel
The compass of consumers and circumstances (environment) are:
(C6) Consumer – (Needle of compass to consumer)
The factors related to consumers can be explained by the first character of four directions marked on the compass model. These can be remembered by the cardinal directions, hence the name compass model:
N = Needs
W = Wants
S = Security
E = Education:(consumer education)
(C7) circumstances – (Needle of compass to circumstances )
In addition to the consumer, there are various uncontrollable external environmental factors encircling the companies. Here it can also be explained by the first character of the four directions marked on the compass model:
N = National and International (Political, legal and ethical) environment
W = Weather
S = Social and cultural
E = Economic
These can also be remembered by the cardinal directions marked on a compass. The 7Cs Compass Model is a framework in co-marketing (symbiotic marketing). It has been criticized for being little more than the four Ps with different points of emphasis. In particular, the seven Cs inclusion of consumers in the marketing mix is criticized, since they are a target of marketing, while the other elements of the marketing mix are tactics. The seven Cs also include numerous strategies for product development, distribution, and pricing, while assuming that consumers want two-way communications with companies.
An alternative approach has been suggested in a book called 'Service 7' by Australian Author, Peter Bowman. Bowman suggests a values based approach to service marketing activities. Bowman suggests implementing seven service marketing principles which include value, business development, reputation, customer service and service design. Service 7 has been widely distributed within Australia.
Since the first propose of marketing mix of 12 marketing variables by Neil H. Borden, the marketing mix have developed in 1960s. The idea of marketing mix was widely used to help with a business. A business can succeed with carry out all these process properly of marketing mix.
However, it is difficult to a company use 12 marketing variables propose by Mr. Borden. So that E. Jerome McCarthy developed the marketing mix into "4Ps". The 4Ps model is known as price, place, promotion and product.
Product can be the "quality, features, benefits, style, design, branding, packaging, services, warranties, guarantees, life cycles, investments and returns".
Product: this is what the business offers a product or service to the customers. Each of the company want their product appeal to everybody even through some kind of product only appeal to a special group of customers. And all the companies are trying to maximize the customer group that can benefit from their products.
Price can be "list pricing, discount pricing, special offer pricing, credit payment or credit terms".
Price: price is the total cost to customer to assume the product, but it is not the cash payment from the business to the supplier. This costs also included learning how to use the product and the peripheral costs. Not only the raw material included, and also the machining costs by workers, transports costs.
Place can be the "direct or indirect channels to market, geographical distribution, territorial coverage, retail outlet, market location, catalogues, inventory, logistics and order fulfilment".
Place: place is the location where a business doing their business. It can be a retail store in a most original way. But nowadays it can mean "a mail order catalogue, a telephone call centre or a website ". As the development of business, e-business is become more and more popular, and this is exactly the reason why website is treated as a location now.
Promotion can be the "advertising, external communications with the media, direct selling and sales promotions".
Promotion: "Promotion is the marketing communication used to make the offer known to potential customers and persuade them to investigate it further ". In terms of promotion can be propose to promotion mix, which is advertising, public relations, sales promotion and personal selling.
The 4Ps of marketing mix which is helpful to the business, and businesses are attempting to find a balance in these 4Ps process to approach the success. And the marketing mix is helpful to the business to simplify the present marketing conditions, and then make the adjustment appropriate.
Booms and Bitner are responsible for the creation of the extended marketing mix, featuring 7P's. E. Jerome McCarthy's original 4P's of product, price, promotion, and place are now joined by people, process and physical evidence. 
People are essential in the marketing of any product or service. In the professional, financial or hospitality service industry, people are not producers, but rather the products themselves.  When people are the product, they impact public perception of an organization as much as any tangible consumer goods. From a marketing management perspective, it is important to ensure that employees represent the company in alignment with broader messaging strategies.  This is easier to ensure when people feel as though they have been treated fairly and earn wages sufficient enough to support their daily lives.
Process refers a "the set of activities that results in delivery of the product benefits". A process could be a sequential order of tasks that an employee undertakes as a part of their job. It can represent sequential steps taken by a number of various employees while attempting to complete a task. Some people are responsible for managing multiple processes at once. For example, a restaurant manager should monitor the performance of employees, ensuring that processes are followed. (S)he is also expected to supervise while customers are promptly greeted, seated, fed, and led out so that the next customer can begin this process. 
Physical evidence is the lasting proof that the service has happened.In terms of buying a physical product, the physical evidence is the product itself. According to Booms and Bitner's framework, "physical evidence is the service is delivered and any tangible goods that facilitate the performance and communication of the service.  Physical evidence is important to customers because the tangible goods are evidence that the seller has (or has not) provided what the customer was expecting . The more inviting the physical environment that surrounds a product when it is sold, the more people are willing to pay for said good or service. Anyone who does not understand how important the physical environment is in business, need only to compare the price of a 4-star and a 2-star hotel.
