The Kromfohrländer (/ˈkroʊmfərlændər/ KROHM-fər-land-ər) is a breed of dog that originated in Germany. It is used as a companion dog.
The Kromfohrländer comes in 2 coat variations: wirehaired (Rauhaar) and smooth haired (Glatthaar). The distinction is the presence of a beard on the wirehaired variety and a rather long coat on the smooth haired variety. Therefore the wirehaired resembles a terrier, while the smooth haired looks rather like a spaniel. The color is brown/tan/buff markings on a white background with a blaze on the face 'as symmetrical as possible.'
This dog is medium in size Height: 38 to 46 centimetres (15 to 18 in) at the withers. Weight: 10 to 14 kilograms (22 to 31 lb).
The Kromfohrländer is a very lively, good-natured, intelligent breed with a comparatively weak hunting instinct, loves to play and run and can adapt to many situations fairly well. Kromfohrländers are very much "people dogs" and they rarely stray very far from their owner. They take to strangers and children rather hesitantly at first, but once they get familiar, they are friends for life.
Epilepsy, cystinuria (buildup of amino acids in the urine), hyperkeratosis ('corny feet' known in some terrier breeds) and patellar luxation (knee dislocation). Breeding dogs are tested for hyperkeratosis through an inexpensive DNA test. It is a breed with very limited genetics and is very difficult to acquire. Currently, a breeding project, supervised by FCI, to expand Kromforhländer genetics is being operated in Europe.
The Kromfohrlander originated in Germany in the 1940s. It is the only dog breed descended from a military mascot dog. 'Original Peter' was found in France by American soldiers during World War 2. Peter came to Germany with his troop and was lost. He was discovered by Ilsa Schleifenbaum, who developed the breed using various dogs (most likely terrier and griffon type breeds) for 10 years.
The Kromfohrländer was first recognized by FCI for showing in 1955.
The Kromfohrlander came to Scandinavia starting in the early 1970's, assisted by Ilsa Schleifenbaum.
The smooth Kromfohrlander was introduced to America in 1997 by Eugene Cummings.
The wirehaired Kromfohrlander was introduced to America in 2000 by Simon Horobin.
The first breeding of smooth coated Kromfohrlanders in America was in 2004 by Eugene Cummings.
The Kromfohrländer was admitted to American Kennel Club's Foundation Stock Service in 2012.
The first Kromfohrlanders were exhibited in America in 2013 at a United Kennel Club dog show in Ann Arbor, Michigan.
The first Kromfohrlanders to compete in American Kennel Club's Open Show category was in December, 2014 in Orlando, Florida.
The first breeding of wirehaired Kromfohrlanders in America was in 2016 by Mary Dixon.
