Jurong Bird Park is an aviary and tourist attraction in Jurong, Singapore. The bird park, managed by Wildlife Reserves Singapore, covers an area of 0.2 square kilometres (49 acres) on the western slope of Jurong Hill, the highest point in the Jurong region.
It was reported by Wildlife Reserves Singapore on 1 June 2016 that Jurong Bird Park will cease operation and be relocated to Mandai in 2020. It will be renamed soon. As for now, operation resumes normally.
The idea of a permanent aviary was first conceived by the late Dr Goh Keng Swee, then Minister for Finance, in 1968. During a World Bank Meeting in Rio de Janeiro, Dr Goh visited its zoological garden and was impressed with its free-flight aviary. He set out to ensure that Singaporeans would have a place where they could escape from urban life and relax with nature.
Work on the aviary started in January 1969. A 35 acre site, on the western slope of Bukit Peropok in Jurong, was chosen for the project. The bird park was expected to be completed by the end of 1969.
On 3 January 1971, Jurong Bird Park, built at a cost of S$3.5 million, was opened to the public.
Jurong Bird Park is now a world-famous bird zoo where there are specimens of magnificent bird life from around the world, including a large flock of flamingos. It is currently the world's largest bird park in terms of the number of birds, and second largest both in the number of bird species and land area (after Germany's Weltvogelpark Walsrode). There are 5,000 birds of 400 species in Jurong Bird Park, of which 29 are of threatened species.
In 2006, Jurong Bird Park completed a S$10 million makeover. With the upgrading, the park boasts a new entrance plaza, a park-owned and managed Bongo Burgers restaurant, an ice cream parlour, a gift shop and a bird hospital.
The African Waterfall Aviary is the second largest walk-in aviary in the world, covering 2 hectares (4.9 acres) and including more than 600 free-flying birds of more than 50 species. The aviary is named after the 30-metre (98 ft) tall Jurong Falls, one of the world's tallest man-made waterfalls. Species include the golden-breasted starling, turacos and the hoopoe.
In one corner of the zoo there is a section full of flightless birds: ostriches, emus, rheas and cassowaries are the residents of this exhibit.
Visitors can see the largest collection of Southeast Asian birds, which has over 200 species. There are large, central walk-in aviaries and peripheral aviaries housing the more delicate and territorial birds. A thunderstorm is simulated at noon each day, followed by a cool, light drizzle. Territorial species are kept in large cages, while species that can coexist with each other (fruit doves and pigeons being two examples) are left to roam freely in the aviary.
About nine storeys high and covering 3,000 square metres (32,000 sq ft), the Lory Loft is the world's largest walk-in flight aviary for lories and lorikeets, with over 1,000 free-flying lories. The ambience is similar to that of a rainforest valley in tropical Northern Australia. Visitors can offer the lories a special nectar mix.
Houses five species of penguins within 1,600 square metres (17,000 sq ft). Featuring a 21-metre (69 ft) tall Portuguese galleon façade and designed to resemble a ship, the interior of Penguin Coast is constructed with timber beams and wooden flooring. Penguin Coast is home to the Humboldt, rockhopper, macaroni and king penguins, which live in an indoor, climate-controlled den with access to an outdoor enclosure showcasing African penguins, one of the few species that are adapted to the tropics. Joining them are cape shelducks and gulls.
Asia's first nocturnal bird house features a system of reverse lighting, converting day to night and vice versa. On display are 60 birds from 17 species, like the night herons, fish owls, boobook owls and snowy owls. It is akin to a quiet nocturnal walk along a starlit jungle path, watching birds in their nocturnal surroundings and hearing them beckon each other.
Visitors catch a glimpse of all seven species of pelicans, including the endangered Dalmatian pelican. There is a board-walk where visitors can stroll and observe the birds. Visitors can also see the pelicans at the world's first underwater viewing gallery for pelicans, where the birds scoop up fish at feeding time.
This bird show has the world's largest number of performing birds in a single act. Besides highlighting the antics of talented birds like the mimicking cockatoos, this show is also a window onto the natural behaviour of birds like pelicans, flamingos and hornbills.
Visitors watch birds of prey such as eagles, hawks and falcons, who will fly in loops and soar above the treetops. Visitors also learn about falconry as these birds are put through their paces in a simulated hunt.
Visitors enjoy a parrot show over lunch in front of the flamingo lake.
Awarded to Jurong Bird Park:
Michelin 2-star rating, 2008
Conservation & Research Award, International Symposium on Breeding Birds in Captivity, 2006 and 2007
Excellence Award, Association of Southeast Asian Nations Tourism Association, 2004 and 2007
Best Loved Pro-Family Business, Singapore, 2006
Superstar Winner of the Excellent Service Awards, Singapore Tourism Board, 2004
Tourism Host of the Year, Singapore Tourism Board, 2003
Breeders Award, American Pheasant and Waterfowl Society, 2001
Highly Commended, Tourism For Tomorrow International Awards, 1993
Jurong Bird Park can be accessed on SBS Transit Service 194 from Boon Lay Bus Interchange, which has connections to the Mass Rapid Transit at Boon Lay MRT station.
Gardens by the Bay, Singapore
Night Safari, Singapore
River Safari, Singapore
Singapore Botanic Gardens
Singapore Zoo
