The wheatears /ˈhwiːtɪər/ are passerine birds of the genus Oenanthe. They were formerly considered to be members of the thrush family, Turdidae, but are now more commonly placed in the flycatcher family, Muscicapidae. This is an Old World group, but the northern wheatear has established a foothold in eastern Canada and Greenland and in western Canada and Alaska.
The name "wheatear" is not derived from "wheat" or any sense of "ear", but is a 16th-century linguistic corruption of "white" and "arse", referring to the prominent white rump found in most species.
Oenanthe is also the name of a plant genus, the water dropworts, and is derived from the Greek oenos (οίνος) "wine" and anthos (ανθός) "flower". In the case of the plant genus, it refers to the wine-like scent of the flowers. In the case of the wheatear, it refers to the northern wheatear's return to Greece in the spring just as the grapevines blossom.
This genus formerly included fewer species. Molecular phylogenetic studies of birds in the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae, found that the genus Cercomela was polyphyletic with five species, including the type species C. melanura, phylogenetically nested within the genus Oenanthe. This implied that Cercomela and Oenanthe were synonyms. The type species for Oenanthe, (O. leucopyga, Vieillot, 1816) is earlier than the type for Cercomela (C. melanura, Bonaparte, 1856) and has taxonomic priority making Cercomela a junior synonym.
Most species have characteristic black and white or red and white markings on their rumps or their long tails. Most species are strongly sexually dimorphic; only the male has the striking plumage patterns characteristic of the genus, though the females share the white or red rump patches.
The genus contains 28 species. Of these, 5 were formerly assigned to Cercomela:
Northern wheatear, Oenanthe oenanthe
Capped wheatear, Oenanthe pileata
Red-breasted wheatear, Oenanthe bottae
Heuglin's wheatear, Oenanthe heuglini
Isabelline wheatear, Oenanthe isabellina
Hooded wheatear, Oenanthe monacha
Desert wheatear, Oenanthe deserti
Black-eared wheatear, Oenanthe hispanica
Cyprus wheatear, Oenanthe cypriaca
Pied wheatear, Oenanthe pleschanka
White-fronted black chat, Oenanthe albifrons (formerly in either Pentholaea or Myrmecocichla)
Somali wheatear, Oenanthe phillipsi
Red-rumped wheatear, Oenanthe moesta
Blackstart, Oenanthe melanura (formerly in Cercomela)
Familiar chat, Oenanthe familiaris (formerly in Cercomela)
Brown-tailed rock chat, Oenanthe scotocerca (formerly in Cercomela)
Sombre rock chat, Oenanthe dubia (formerly in Cercomela)
Brown rock chat, Oenanthe fusca (formerly in Cercomela)
Variable wheatear, Oenanthe picata
Black wheatear, Oenanthe leucura
Abyssinian wheatear, Oenanthe lugubris
White-crowned wheatear, Oenanthe leucopyga
Hume's wheatear, Oenanthe alboniger
Finsch's wheatear, Oenanthe finschii
Mourning wheatear, Oenanthe lugens
Arabian wheatear, Oenanthe lugentoides
Kurdish wheatear, Oenanthe xanthoprymna
Red-tailed wheatear, Oenanthe chrysopygia
Wheatears are terrestrial insectivorous birds of open, often dry, country. They often nest in rock crevices or disused burrows. Northern species are long-distance migrants, wintering in Africa.
Oenanthe kormosi (Late Miocenee of Polgardi, Hungary) 
Oenanthe pongraczi (Plioceme of Csarnota, Hungary) 
