The Cebidae are one of the five families of New World monkeys now recognised. It includes the capuchin monkeys and squirrel monkeys. These species are found throughout tropical and subtropical South and Central America.
Cebid monkeys are arboreal animals that only rarely travel on the ground. They are generally small monkeys, ranging in size up to that of the brown capuchin, with a body length of 33 to 56 cm, and a weight of 2.5 to 3.9 kilograms. They are somewhat variable in form and coloration, but all have the wide, flat, noses typical of New World monkeys. They are different from marmosets as they have additional molar tooth and a prehensile tail.
They are omnivorous, mostly eating fruit and insects, although the proportions of these foods vary greatly between species. They have the dental formula:2.1.3.2-32.1.3.2-3
Females give birth to one or two young after a gestation period of between 130 and 170 days, depending on species. They are social animals, living in groups of between five and forty individuals, with the smaller species typically forming larger groups. They are generally diurnal in habit.
Previously, New World monkeys were divided between Callitrichidae and this family. For a few recent years, marmosets, tamarins, and lion tamarins were placed as a subfamily (Callitrichinae) in Cebidae, while moving other genera from Cebidae into the families Aotidae, Pitheciidae and Atelidae. The most recent classification of New World monkeys again splits the callitrichids off, leaving only the capuchins and squirrel monkeys in this family.
Family Cebidae: capuchins and squirrel monkeys
Subfamily Cebinae
Genus Cebus
Kaapori capuchin, Cebus kaapori
Wedge-capped capuchin, Cebus olivaceus
White-headed capuchin, Cebus capucinus
White-fronted capuchin, Cebus albifrons
Genus Sapajus
Black-striped capuchin, Sapajus libidinosus
Black capuchin, Sapajus nigritus
Blond capuchin, Sapajus flavius
Golden-bellied capuchin, Sapajus xanthosternos
Tufted capuchin, Sapajus apella
Subfamily Saimiriinae
Genus Saimiri
Bare-eared squirrel monkey, Saimiri ustus
Black squirrel monkey, Saimiri vanzolini
Black-capped squirrel monkey, Saimiri boliviensis
Central American squirrel monkey, Saimiri oerstedi
Common squirrel monkey, Saimiri sciureus
Subfamily Cebinae
Genus Acrecebus
Acrecebus fraileyi
Genus Dolichocebus
Dolichocebus gaimanensis
Genus Chilecebus
Chilecebus carrascoensis
Genus Neosaimiri
Neosaimiri fieldsi
Genus Laventiana
Laventiana annectens
