A cacique (Spanish: [kaˈsike]; Portuguese: [kɐˈsikɨ, kaˈsiki]; feminine form: cacica) is a leader of an indigenous group, derived from the Taíno for the pre-Columbian chiefs or leaders of tribes in the Bahamas, Greater Antilles and the northern Lesser Antilles.
The Spanish used the word as a title for the leaders of the other indigenous groups that they encountered in the Western Hemisphere territories they occupied, with the Andean region being the major exception being called there by their local denomination "kuraka". In Colonial Mexico, caciques and their families were considered part of the Mexican nobility, often also holding the Spanish noble honorific don and doña and some having entailed estates or cacicazgos. The records of many of these Mexican estates are held in the Mexican national archives in a section Vínculos ("entails").
In Mexico, the Spaniards' use of the term cacique to designate indigenous rulers had important implications since individuals and communities might claim a status for which, in the indigenous system of nomenclature, they would not have fulfilled the criteria.
In Peru, the Spaniards allowed the caciques maintain their nobility titles as long as they converted to Catholicism, this was maintained without much restraint until the Tupac Amaru II rebellion, after the rebellion the andean nobility was forced to present proofs about their nobility titles, something that many of them couldn´t do because of the burning and theft of their assets after the rebellion, some mestizos took advantage of the situation and presented questionable documents that accredited them as the true descendants of the precolumbian kurakas.
In the modern Spanish language, the term has come to mean a local political boss who exercises significant power.
The term is also used in the Portuguese language to describe the leaders of indigenous communities in Brazil. It is also frequently used in Portugal to describe how certain influential and well-known students use their powerful social character to influence student body elections in the student movement in Portugal's major universities.
In Spain, Portugal and Brazil, the word is most commonly used in a third sense, "a person in a village or region who exercises excessive influence in political matters."
Cacique comes from the Taíno word kassiquan, meaning "to keep house."
In the Taíno culture, the cacique rank was apparently established through democratic means. His importance in the tribe was determined by the size of his tribe rather than his warlord skills since the Taínos were mostly a pacifist culture. They also enjoyed several privileges for their standing: they lived in a larger rectangular hut in the centre of the village, rather than the circular huts of other villagers, and had a special sitting place for the areytos (ceremonial dances) and the ceremonial ball game.
The derivative term "Caciquismo" has been used to describe a political system determined by the power of local bosses (caciques), who successfully influence the electoral process in their favour. It has been used most notably to refer to late 19th century Spain and early 20th century  and twentieth century Mexico.
It is arguable that Galicia, a province in the northwest of Spain, has been kept in a continual state of strangulated growth over centuries as a result of caciquismo and nepotism. According to Ramon Akal Gonzalez, "Galicia still suffers from this anachronistic caste of caciques" (Obra Completa II, 1977, page 111). Among the scions of the Galician cacique clans that originated from this region of Spain are such absolutist rulers as Francisco Franco, Fidel Castro and Jorge Videla.
The persistence of archaic political forces in present-day Latin America manifests itself primarily in the large role that caciquismo still plays, even in countries sufficiently advanced to prevent personal dictatorships by caudillos.
The term cacique democracy has also been used to describe the political system in the Philippines where local leaders remain very strong, with almost warlord-type powers, in many parts of the country. The Philippines was a Spanish colony for around 300 years until the United States removed the Spanish and assumed control in the late 19th century. The US administration subsequently introduced many commercial, political and administrative reforms which, on the face of it, were quite progressive and directed towards the modernization of government and commerce in the Philippines. However, the local traditional Filipino elites, being better educated and better connected than much of the local population, were often able to take advantage of the changes to bolster their positions. The result, according to some scholars, is that democracy in the Philippines became a cacique democracy. The idea was discussed in a well-known article by Benedict Anderson in 1988 and other scholars
Cassique
Curaca
Kalku
Lonko
Machi (shaman)
Gregor MacGregor, he claimed to be cacique of Poyais, a fictional Central American country.
