The Apocrita are a suborder of insects in the order Hymenoptera. It includes wasps, bees, and ants, and consists of many families. It contains the most advanced hymenopterans and is distinguished from Symphyta by the narrow "waist" (petiole) formed between the first two segments of the actual abdomen; the first abdominal segment is fused to the thorax, and is called the propodeum. Therefore, it is general practice, when discussing the body of an apocritan in a technical sense, to refer to the mesosoma and metasoma (or "gaster") rather than the "thorax" and "abdomen", respectively. The ovipositor of the female either extends freely or is retracted, and may be developed into a stinger for both defense and paralyzing prey. Larvae are legless and blind, and either feed inside a host (plant or animal) or in a nest cell provisioned by their mothers.
The Apocrita have historically been split into two groups, "Parasitica" and Aculeata, but these are rankless groupings in present classifications, if they appear at all. The term Parasitica is an artificial (paraphyletic) group comprising the majority of hymenopteran insects, with respective members living as parasitoids on what amounts to nearly "every other species of insect", and many noninsects. Most species are small, with the ovipositor adapted for piercing. In some hosts, the parasitoids induce metamorphosis prematurely, and in others it is prolonged. There are even species that are hyperparasites (that which are parasitoids on other parasitoids). The Parasitica lay their eggs inside or on another insect (egg, larva or pupa) and their larvae grow and develop within or on that host. The host is nearly always killed. Many parasitic hymenopterans are used as biological control agents to control pests, such as caterpillars, true bugs and hoppers, flies, and weevils.
The Aculeata are a monophyletic group that includes those species in which the female's ovipositor is modified into a "stinger" to inject venom. Groups include the familiar ants, bees, and various types of parasitic and predatory wasps; it also includes all of the social hymenopterans.
Among the nonparasitic and nonsocial Aculeata, larvae are fed with captured prey (typically alive and paralyzed) or may be fed pollen and nectar. The social Aculeata feed their young prey (paper wasps and hornets), or pollen and nectar (bees), or perhaps seeds, fungi, or even nonviable eggs (ants).
Suborder Apocrita
(unranked) Aculeata
Superfamily Apoidea (bees and sphecoid wasps)
Family Ampulicidae (cockroach wasps)
Family Andrenidae (mason bees)
Family Apidae (carpenter bees, digger bees, cuckoo bees, bumble bees, orchid bees, stingless bees, and honeybees)
Family Colletidae (yellow-faced bees and plasterer bees)
Family Crabronidae (sand wasps, bee wolves, etc.)
Family Dasypodaidae
Family Halictidae ("sweat bees")
Family Heterogynaidae
Family Megachilidae (leaf-cutting bees)
Family Meganomiidae
Family Melittidae
Family Stenotritidae
Family Sphecidae (digger wasps)
Superfamily Chrysidoidea
Family Bethylidae
Family Chrysididae (cuckoo wasps)
Family Dryinidae
Family Embolemidae
Family Plumariidae
Family Sclerogibbidae
Family Scolebythidae
Superfamily Vespoidea
Family Bradynobaenidae
Family Formicidae (ants)
Family Mutillidae (velvet ants)
Family Pompilidae (spider wasps)
Family Rhopalosomatidae
Family Sapygidae
Family Scoliidae
Family Sierolomorphidae
Family Tiphiidae
Family Vespidae (paper wasps, potter wasps, hornets, pollen wasps, yellowjackets)
(unranked) Parasitica
Superfamily Ceraphronoidea
Family Ceraphronidae
Family Megaspilidae
Superfamily Chalcidoidea
Family Agaonidae (fig wasps)
Family Aphelinidae
Family Chalcididae (chalcid wasps)
Family Encyrtidae
Family Eucharitidae
Family Eulophidae
Family Eupelmidae
Family Eurytomidae (seed chalcids)
Family Leucospidae
Family Mymaridae (fairyflies) - the smallest of all insects
Family Ormyridae
Family Perilampidae
Family Pteromalidae
Family Rotoitidae
Family Signiphoridae
Family Tanaostigmatidae
Family Tetracampidae
Family Torymidae
Family Trichogrammatidae
Superfamily Cynipoidea
Family Austrocynipidae
Family Cynipidae (gall wasps)
Family Figitidae
Family Ibaliidae
Family Liopteridae
Superfamily Evanioidea
Family Aulacidae
Family Evaniidae (ensign wasps)
Family Gasteruptiidae
Superfamily Ichneumonoidea
Family Braconidae
Family Ichneumonidae (ichneumon wasps)
Superfamily Megalyroidea
Family Megalyridae
Superfamily Mymarommatoidea - sometimes called Serphitoidea
Family Mymarommatidae
Superfamily Platygastroidea
Family Platygastridae
Family Scelionidae
Superfamily Proctotrupoidea
Family Austroniidae
Family Diapriidae
Family Heloridae
Family Maamingidae
Family Monomachidae
Family Pelecinidae
Family Peradeniidae
Family Proctorenyxidae
Family Proctotrupidae
Family Roproniidae
Family Vanhorniidae
Superfamily Stephanoidea
Family Stephanidae
Superfamily Trigonaloidea
Family Trigonalidae
