Gallirallus is a genus that contains about a dozen living, and several recently extinct, species of rails that live in the Australasian-Pacific region. The genus is characterised by an ability to colonise relatively small and isolated islands and thereafter to evolve flightless forms, many of which became extinct following Polynesian settlement.
Many of the rails, including the well-known weka of New Zealand, are flightless or nearly so; others, such as the buff-banded rail, can travel for considerable distances once airborne even though they are not great flyers. This has enabled the flying species of this genus to colonize islands all over the region.
Many of the resultant flightless island endemics became extinct after the arrival of humans, which hunted these birds for food, introduced novel predators like rats, dogs or pigs, and upset the local ecosystems. A common Polynesian name of these rails, mainly relatives of G. philippensis, is veka/weka (in English, this name is generally limited to Gallirallus australis).
One species, the Guam rail, is extinct in the wild; there exists a semi-wild population in preparation for reintroduction to its original habitat. Three more species have gone extinct in historic times, while the New Caledonian rail probably is extinct. The Sharpe's rail, only known from the type specimen of unclear origin, may also be extinct, although recent evidence suggests that it is invalid, and instead should be regarded as a morph of the buff-banded rail. Two further species are assumed from circumstantial evidence to have survived into the Modern era but are not known from recent specimens.
On the other hand, Gallirallus species are (with the exception of the weka) notoriously retiring and shy birds with often drab coloration. Given that the Okinawa rail and the Calayan rail have only been discovered in the late 20th century and as late as 2004, respectively, it cannot be ruled out that the New Caledonian and Sharpe's rail may still exist.
Weka, Gallirallus australis
Calayan rail, Gallirallus calayanensis
Tongatapu rail, Gallirallus hypoleucus - extinct (late 18th - 19th century)
New Caledonian rail, Gallirallus lafresnayanus - probably extinct (c. 1990?)
Sharpe's rail, Gallirallus sharpei - if valid, possibly extinct (20th century?)
Slaty-breasted rail, Gallirallus striatus
Norfolk Island rail, Gallirallus sp. - possibly survived to the early 19th century
These species are placed by BirdLife International and IUCN in separate genus Hypotaenidia
Okinawa rail, Gallirallus okinawae
Barred rail, Gallirallus torquatus
New Britain rail, Gallirallus insignis
Roviana rail, Gallirallus rovianae
Guam rail, Gallirallus owstoni - extinct in the wild (late 1980s)
Lord Howe woodhen, Gallirallus sylvestris
Buff-banded rail, Gallirallus philippensis
Dieffenbach's rail, Gallirallus dieffenbachii - extinct (mid-19th century)
Wake Island rail, Gallirallus wakensis - extinct (1945)
Tahiti rail, Gallirallus pacificus - extinct (late 18th - 19th century)
and also the genus Nesoclopeus
Nuku Hiva rail, Gallirallus epulare
New Ireland rail, Gallirallus ernstmayri
Ua Huka rail, Gallirallus gracilitibia
Niue rail, Gallirallus huiatua 
Tinian rail, Gallirallus pendiculentus
Aguiguan rail, Gallirallus pisonii
Mangaia rail, Gallirallus ripleyi
Tahuata rail, Gallirallus roletti
Tubuai rail, Gallirallus steadmani
Huahine rail, Gallirallus storrsolsoni
Rota rail, Gallirallus temptatus
‘Eua rail, Gallirallus vekamatolu - possibly survived to the early 19th century
Hiva Oa rail, ?Gallirallus sp.
