An ecozone is the broadest biogeographic division of the Earth's land surface, based on distributional patterns of terrestrial organisms.
Ecozones delineate large areas of the Earth's surface within which organisms have been evolving in relative isolation over long periods of time, separated from one another by geographic features, such as oceans, broad deserts, or high mountain ranges, that constitute barriers to migration. As such, ecozone designations are used to indicate general groupings of organisms based on their shared biogeography. Ecozones correspond to the floristic kingdoms of botany or zoogeographic regions of zoology.
Ecozones are characterized by the evolutionary history of the organisms they contain. They are distinct from biomes, also known as major habitat types, which are divisions of the Earth's surface based on life form, or the adaptation of animals, fungi, micro-organisms and plants to climatic, soil, and other conditions. Biomes are characterized by similar climax vegetation. Each ecozone may include a number of different biomes. A tropical moist broadleaf forest in Central America, for example, may be similar to one in New Guinea in its vegetation type and structure, climate, soils, etc., but these forests are inhabited by animals, fungi, micro-organisms and plants with very different evolutionary histories.
The patterns of distribution of living organisms in the world's ecozones were shaped by the process of plate tectonics, which has redistributed the world's land masses over geological history.
The Palearctic and Nearctic are sometimes grouped into the Holarctic ecozone.
The World Wildlife Fund scheme is broadly similar to Miklos Udvardy's system, the chief difference being the delineation of the Australasian ecozone relative to the Antarctic, Oceanic, and Indomalayan ecozones. In the WWF system, The Australasia ecozone includes Australia, Tasmania, the islands of Wallacea, New Guinea, the East Melanesian islands, New Caledonia, and New Zealand. Udvardy's Australian realm includes only Australia and Tasmania; he places Wallacea in the Indomalayan Realm, New Guinea, New Caledonia, and East Melanesia in the Oceanian Realm, and New Zealand in the Antarctic Realm.
The WWF scheme further subdivides the ecozones into bioregions, defined as "geographic clusters of ecoregions that may span several habitat types, but have strong biogeographic affinities, particularly at taxonomic levels higher than the species level (genus, family)." The WWF bioregions are as follows:
Afrotropic
Antarctic
Australasia
Australia
New Caledonia
New Guinea and East Melanesian Islands
New Zealand
Wallacea
Indomalaya
Indian subcontinent
Indochina
Sunda Shelf and Philippine Archipelago
Nearctic
Canadian Shield
Eastern North America
Northern Mexico and Southwestern North America
Western North America
Neotropical
Amazonia
Caribbean
Central America
Central Andes
Eastern South America
Everglades
Northern Andes
Orinoco
Southern South America
Oceania
Micronesia
Polynesia
Palearctic
Asia
East Asia north of the Himalayan system's foothills to the arctic
Himalayan
Tibetan Plateau steppe
Yunnan–Guizhou Plateau
Northeast Asia
Russian Far East
Central Asia - Iranian Plateau and north to the arctic.
Temperate Asia biocountry
Mongolian Plateau
Eurasian Steppe
Asian Russia (central)
Asian-Siberian region
Western Asia
Arabian desert
Mediterranean Near East (Roughly corresponds to the Levant)
Anatolian Plateau
Transcaucasia
Northern Africa
Atlantic coastal desert
Sahara desert
Mediterranean Maghreb
Atlas montane
Europe (Northern, Middle, Eastern, Southwestern, and Southeastern Europe biocountries) - Mediterranean to the arctic.
European Mediterranean Basin
Iberian Peninsula
North Caucasus
Alps montane
Carpathians
Scandinavia
European Russia
Euro-Siberian region
Macaronesia
Cosmopolitan distribution
Ecotone
