The dormouse is a rodent of the family Gliridae (this family is also variously called Myoxidae or Muscardinidae by different taxonomists). Dormice are mostly found in Europe, although some live in Africa and Asia. They are particularly known for their long periods of hibernation. As only one species of dormouse is native to the British Isles, in everyday English usage "dormouse" can refer either to that one species (the hazel dormouse) or to the family as a whole.
Dormice are small rodents, with body lengths between 6 and 19 cm (2.4 and 7.5 in), and weights between 15 and 180 g (0.53 and 6.35 oz). They are generally mouse-like in appearance but with furred, rather than scaly, tails. They are largely but not exclusively arboreal, agile and well adapted to climbing. Most species are nocturnal. Dormice have an excellent sense of hearing and signal each other with a variety of vocalisations.
Dormice are omnivorous, typically feeding on fruits, berries, flowers, nuts and insects. They are unique among rodents in that they lack a cecum, a part of the gut used in other species to ferment vegetable matter. Their dental formula is similar to that of squirrels, although they often lack premolars:
Dormice breed once or occasionally twice a year, producing litters with an average of four young after a gestation period of 22–24 days. They can live for as long as five years. The young are born hairless and helpless, and their eyes do not open until about 18 days after birth. They typically become sexually mature after the end of their first hibernation. Dormice live in small family groups, with home ranges that vary widely between species and depend on the availability of food.
One of the most notable characteristics of those dormice that live in temperate zones is hibernation. They can hibernate six months out of the year, or even longer if the weather does not become warm enough, sometimes waking for brief periods to eat food they had previously stored nearby. During the summer they accumulate fat in their bodies to nourish them through the hibernation period.
Their name is based on this trait; it comes from Anglo-Norman dormeus, which means "sleepy (one)"; the word was later altered by folk etymology to resemble the word "mouse". The sleepy behaviour of the dormouse character in Lewis Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland reflects this familiar trait of dormice.
The edible dormouse was considered a delicacy in ancient Rome, either as a savoury appetizer or as a dessert (dipped in honey and poppy seeds). The Romans used a special kind of enclosure, a glirarium, to rear dormice for the table. It is also considered a delicacy in several places in Croatia, namely Lika, and islands of Hvar and Brač. Dormouse fat was used by the Elizabethans to induce sleep.
The Gliridae are one of the oldest extant rodent families, with a fossil record dating back to the early Eocene. As currently understood, they descended in Europe from early Paleogene ischyromyids such as Microparamys (Sparnacomys) chandoni. The early and middle Eocene genus Eogliravus represents the earliest and most primitive glirid taxon; the oldest species, Eogliravus wildi, is known from isolated teeth from the early Eocene of France and a complete specimen of the early middle Eocene of the Messel pit in Germany. They appear in Africa in the upper Miocene and only relatively recently in Asia. Many types of extinct dormouse species have been identified. During the Pleistocene, giant dormice the size of large rats, such as Leithia melitensis, lived on the islands of Malta and Sicily.
The family consists of 29 living species, in three subfamilies and (arguably) 9 genera:
FAMILY GLIRIDAE – Dormice
Subfamily Graphiurinae
Genus Graphiurus, African dormice
Angolan African dormouse, Graphiurus angolensis
Christy's dormouse, Graphiurus christyi
Jentink's dormouse, Graphiurus crassicaudatus
Johnston's African dormouse, Graphiurus johnstoni
Kellen's dormouse, Graphiurus kelleni
Lorrain dormouse, Graphiurus lorraineus
Small-eared dormouse, Graphiurus microtis
Monard's dormouse, Graphiurus monardi
Woodland dormouse, Graphiurus murinus
Nagtglas's African dormouse, Graphiurus nagtglasii
Spectacled dormouse, Graphiurus ocularis
Rock dormouse, Graphiurus platyops
Stone dormouse, Graphiurus rupicola
Silent dormouse, Graphiurus surdus
Graphiurus walterverheyeni 
Subfamily Leithiinae
Genus Chaetocauda
Chinese dormouse, Chaetocauda sichuanensis
Genus Dryomys
Woolly dormouse, Dryomys laniger
Balochistan Forest dormouse, Dryomys niethammeri
Forest dormouse, Dryomys nitedula
Genus Eliomys, garden dormice
Asian garden dormouse, Eliomys melanurus
Maghreb garden dormouse, Eliomys munbyanus
Garden dormouse, Eliomys quercinus
Genus Hypnomys† (Balearic dormouse)
Majorcan giant dormouse, Hypnomys morphaeus†
Minorcan giant dormouse, Hypnomys mahonensis†
Genus Leithia†
Maltese Giant Dormouse, Leithia melitensis†
Leithia cartei†
Genus Muscardinus
Hazel dormouse, Muscardinus avellanarius
Genus Myomimus, mouse-tailed dormice
Masked mouse-tailed dormouse, Myomimus personatus
Roach's mouse-tailed dormouse, Myomimus roachi
Setzer's mouse-tailed dormouse, Myomimus setzeri
Genus Selevinia
Desert dormouse, Selevinia betpakdalaensis
Subfamily Glirinae
Genus Glirulus
Japanese dormouse, Glirulus japonicus
Genus Glis
Edible dormouse, Glis glis
Subfamily Bransatoglirinae
Genus Oligodyromys
Genus Bransatoglis
Bransatoglis adroveri Majorca, Early Oligocene
Bransatoglis planus Eurasia, Early Oligocene
The Dormouse is a character in Lewis Carroll's novel Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1865). Alice meets him when she visits the Mad Hatter and the March Hare.
Belgian comics artist Raymond Macherot created a comic strip series about a red dormouse, Chlorophylle, in 1954.
