The frogmouths are a group of nocturnal birds related to the nightjars. They are found from the Indian Subcontinent across Southeast Asia to Australia.
They are named for their large flattened hooked bill and huge frog-like gape, which they use to capture insects. Their flight is weak.
They rest horizontally on branches during the day, camouflaged by their cryptic plumage. Up to three white eggs are laid in the fork of a branch, and are incubated by the female at night and the male in the day.
The three Podargus species are large frogmouths restricted to Australia and New Guinea, that have massive flat broad bills. They are known to take larger prey such as small vertebrates (frogs, mice, etc.), which are sometimes beaten against a stone before swallowing. The ten Batrachostomus frogmouths are found in tropical Asia. They have smaller, more rounded bills and are predominantly insectivorous. Both Podargus and Batrachostomus have bristles around the base of the bill, and Batrachostomus has other, longer bristles which may exist to protect the eyes from insect prey. In April 2007, a new species of frogmouth was described from the Solomon Islands and placed in a newly established genus, Rigidipenna.
Recent research suggests that the two frogmouth groups may not be as closely related as previously thought, and that the Asian species may be separable as a new family, the Batrachostomidae. Usually placed in the order Caprimulgiformes, another recent study has cast doubt on the frogmouths' placement within that order, and they may be distinct enough to warrant an order of their own, Podargiformes, as Gregory Mathews proposed in 1918.
Genus Podargus
Tawny frogmouth, Podargus strigoides
Marbled frogmouth, Podargus ocellatus
Papuan frogmouth, Podargus papuensis
Genus Batrachostomus
Large frogmouth, Batrachostomus auritus
Dulit frogmouth, Batrachostomus harterti
Philippine frogmouth, Batrachostomus septimus
Gould's frogmouth, Batrachostomus stellatus
Sri Lanka frogmouth, Batrachostomus moniliger
Hodgson's frogmouth, Batrachostomus hodgsoni
Short-tailed frogmouth, Batrachostomus poliolophus
Javan frogmouth, Batrachostomus javensis
Blyth's frogmouth, Batrachostomus affinis
Sunda frogmouth, Batrachostomus cornutus
Genus Rigidipenna
Solomons frogmouth, Rigidipenna inexpectata
