Ox Tales, also known as The Tales of Boes' Gang (げらげらブース物語, Geragera Būsu Monogatari), is an animated television series produced by Telecable Benelux B.V. and Cosmos Studio in association with Saban Entertainment. It was a co-production between Japan and the Netherlands based on a Dutch comic strip Boes created by Wil Raymakers and Thijs Wilms. The series ran on the Japanese network TV Tokyo from April 7, 1987–March 29, 1988. It consists of 102 15-minute episodes, which were usually transmitted as 51 half-hour shows of two episodes each.
The series has been aired in many countries outside Japan and has been dubbed and subtitled in English and numerous other languages.
The plot follows the adventures of Ollie the ox as he runs The Funny Farm, containing possibly every creature known, with his best friend Jack the turtle while narrated by a sarcastic toucan.
Ox Tales still continues to appear as a column strip in several Dutch daily and weekly newspapers.
Ollie, the ox - Ollie is the owner of the Funny Farm and isn't exactly the greenest grass on the farm. Although he means well, he sometimes makes situations worse than they usually are, but this is usually rare.
Jack Turtleson, the turtle- Jack is probably Ollie's best friend, as he's seen mostly hanging out with him in each episode. However, in every mess that he and Ollie get into, you can bet that his shell will break apart at least once.
Sammy, the dog - Ollie's most loyal pet on the farm who sometimes accompanies Ollie and Jack on their adventures.
Edward the elephant - When an air hose or a water hose is needed, Edward comes through.
Ellen the elephant
Igor the octopus - Igor is literally inflatable.
Crown the eagle
Gaylord the gorilla - A prime primate who usually doesn't know his own strength at times.
Bongo the gorilla
Audrey the ostrich - She usually has her head stuck in the ground somewhere on the funny farm.
Rodney the rhino - A hot-headed rhino who can't seem to keep his horn on or even in one piece.
Holly the kangaroo
Bob the kangaroo
Weave the kangaroo
Jenny the kangaroo
Turbo Tail Teddy the kangaroo
Larry the cheetah
Lenny the lion - Probably past his prime, as evidenced by his balding mane, Lenny fancies himself as a great hunter, although he can't seem to take the initiative when he finally catches his meal.
Towilla the toucan - A sarcastic toucan who is the narrator of the show.
Bruce the bear - A greedy bear who often tries to steal Ollie's honey.
Buggy the stork
Horace the horse - A hot-headed and stubborn horse that tends to have a knack for fighting.
Moe the mole - Pops up from time to time as a segue between scenes, usually laughing at a comedic situation with a laugh similar to Woody Woodpecker's, although he knows when to keep his laughter under control, especially with situations involving crocodiles. Sometimes his laughter is interrupted by something related to the situation he's laughing at.
Harry the sloth
Hannah the hen - Leader of a gang chickens that don't take kindly to having their eggs stolen by predators.
Mr. Croack frog
Bibbo the owl
Jojo the baboon
Samson the seal
Shirley the sheep
Walter the woodpecker
Willy the woodpecker
Hilda the hippo
Robby the rooster
Paul the polar bear
Down Hill Donny the stork
Nessie the cow
Calvin the calf - a juvenile cow who always has the need to suck on an udder.
Topsy the aardvark
Tom the turkey
Tim the orangutan
Patrick the porcupine
The MacDuffs the storks
Snuffles the panda
Zane the zebra - a zebra who has about as much stubbornness as Horace.
Peggy the pig - Usually she'll be found feeding her piglets.
Peter the pig
Jolly the dolphin
Tiger the cat
Cecil the skunk- a mischievous skunk with both a copious flatulence problem and a rather sadistic habit of only wanting to relieve his massive amounts of gas, if he can do so in the presence of others.
Bura the crow
Rott the parrot
Cal the crocodile - a crocodile with a big mouth and a big appetite, and will try to eat any animal on the farm, but fails to do so in any way.
Morris the mouse - A strategic mouse who knows how to get away in a hurry, and ruin mouse-capturing plans of others in the process.
Calvin the cat - He's the resident mouse hunter on the farm, although Morris mostly gets the better of him.
Directors: Hiroshi Sasagawa, Haramaki Naka (co-director)
From an original idea by: Wil Raymakers, Thijs Wilms
Music: Shinsuke Kazado, Clous van Mechelen
Special effects and sound design : Hisao Shirai
Series Composition: Matsue Jinbo, Tony Dirne, Rob Dirne
Writers: Nao Furukawa, Toshi Ohira, Mario de Vries
Producers: Dennis Livson, Kazuo Tabata
Executive producer: Haim Saban
Supervising producer: Winston Richard
Directors: Robert V. Barron, Tom Wyner
Executive in charge of production: Jerald E. Bergh
Associate producer: Eric S. Rollman
Script supervisor: Tony Oliver
Music by: Haim Saban & Shuki Levy
Original idea & character designs: Wil Raymakers, Thijs Wilms
Tracy Alexander
Robert Axelrod
Robert V. Barron
Robert Benedict
R. Dwight
Richard Epcar
Melora Harte
Dave Mallow
Benjamin Lesko
Tony Oliver
Steve Kramer
Robert Deutsch
Doug Stone
Michael McConnohie
Mike Reynolds
Barbara Riel
Donald Roche
Michael Sorich
Jeff Winkless
Tom Wyner
Shannon Mahan
Eric Elfman
Lisa Paulette
Dayna Barron
Wendee Manhel
Johnny Goff
Heather Upjohn
Tim Reid
Michael Santiago
Jon Page
Byrd Ehlmann
Ann Burgund
Nora L. Goodman
Joe Ellison
Edie Mirman
Ardwight Chamberlain
Barbara Oliver
Mark Ryan-Martin
Eric Early
A.J. Henderson - Olly ox, narrator, Jack Turtleson
Julian Bailey - Moe the mole
A few episodes of the show were released on VHS in the early 1990s; the show was officially released on DVD in Portugal and Spain in 2006.
