Guerrilla Games is a first party video game developer based in Amsterdam, Netherlands, and is a wholly owned subsidiary of Sony Interactive Entertainment. It currently employs approximately 270 individuals, and is headed by managing director Hermen Hulst.
The developer is best known for its Killzone series, which is exclusive to PlayStation. The most recent game in the series, Killzone Shadow Fall, was first released in North America on 15 November 2013. On 18 August 2010 during a press briefing at Gamescom in Cologne, Germany, managing director Hermen Hulst confirmed that Guerrilla Games' next title would be an all-new intellectual property, making it Guerrilla's first game not based on the Killzone series since Shellshock: Nam '67. The game was officially announced at Sony's E3 2015 press conference as Horizon Zero Dawn.
Prior to its acquisition by Sony Computer Entertainment, Guerrilla Games was a subsidiary of the large Dutch multimedia conglomerate Lost Boys, and operated under the moniker Lost Boys Games. The developer was formed as a result of a merger between three separate Dutch-based developers, including Orange Games, founded by Arjan Brussee, and Digital Infinity, founded by Arnout van der Kamp. Over the next three and a half years, Lost Boys Games would release four titles, two each for Nintendo's Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance handheld gaming consoles.
In mid-2003, due to a variety of mergers and corporate reshuffling, the gaming unit was sold off to Media Republic, a new media venture by original Lost Boys' founder Michiel Mol, and in July of that year was renamed to Guerrilla Games. The developer began work on its first two titles, Killzone, in development for Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 2, and Shellshock: Nam '67, in development for Eidos Interactive, for the PlayStation 2, Xbox and Windows.
Both titles would be released the following year to mixed reception, however Killzone enjoyed pre-release hype and anticipation, and despite some backfire effect due to the media hype, Killzone went on to sell over a million copies worldwide, earning Greatest Hits and Platinum status in North America and Europe respectively. Guerrilla signed an exclusive development agreement with Sony Computer Entertainment in late 2004, that would see future development solely for Sony's line of video game consoles, the PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable and PlayStation 3. Shellshock: Nam '67 sold over 900,000 copies worldwide. A sequel was developed by Rebellion Developments.
In May 2005, the developer enjoyed more attention and interest, both positive and controversial, after the release of a pre-rendered trailer of its upcoming Killzone sequel, Killzone 2 for the PlayStation 3, at the unveiling of the new console at Sony's press conference during the E3 video game trade show. The hype and skepticism surrounding both the game and its initial unveiling still resonates to this day, and has vaulted Guerrilla to the forefront of developers within Sony Computer Entertainment.
In December 2005, Sony Computer Entertainment announced the acquisition of Guerrilla Games from then parent company Media Republic, making the developer a wholly owned first party studio within the publisher. Guerrilla went on to release Killzone: Liberation for the PlayStation Portable in October 2006, Killzone 2 for the PlayStation 3 in February 2009, and Killzone 3 for the PlayStation 3 in February 2011. It was reported that Guerrilla is currently working on another first person shooter game. On 24 February, co-founder and development director of studio Arjan Brussee, confirmed that he left the studio to work at Visceral Games on a new project.
On 15 August 2012 at Sony's Gamescom Press Conference, Killzone: Mercenary was announced for the PlayStation Vita. It is to be developed by Guerrilla Cambridge (formerly SCE Cambridge). In February 2013, Guerilla announced Killzone Shadow Fall, to be released on the PlayStation 4. On 15 June 2015, during E3 2015 Sony's press conference, Horizon Zero Dawn was announced. Unlike the Killzone series, it is a third-person role-playing game that is set to be released for the PlayStation 4 in 2016.
