Clock Tower (クロックタワー, Kurokku Tawā) is a survival horror point-and-click adventure video game series, originally created by Human Entertainment and continued by Sunsoft and Capcom. Unlike many other survival horror games, the Clock Tower series does not focus on shooting creatures or using violence, but rather using the player's surroundings to hide and escape while solving puzzles and following the narrative.
The first title in the series, Clock Tower (クロックタワー, Kurokku Tawā), was released in 1995 for the Super Famicom exclusively in Japan. The game was later ported to PC in 1997, and WonderSwan in 1999.
''Clock Tower 2 (クロックタワー2), simply known as Clock Tower in North America, was released in 1996 for PlayStation. It is directly connected to its predecessor by use of common main characters and enemies. It was the first Clock Tower game to be released outside Japan, so the "2" in the title was dropped for localization.
An enhanced port of the SNES game Clock Tower released for the Playstation.
''Clock Tower Ghost Head (クロックタワーゴーストヘッド) known as Clock Tower II: The Struggle Within in North America, was originally released in 1998 for PlayStation. While sharing the gameplay mechanics of the first two, the game could be considered a spin-off from the main series. The game has a new set of characters and a setting in Japan, rather than Europe.
Released in 2002 for PlayStation 2. The game features full 3D environments, realistic graphics, and new gameplay mechanics. While Clock Tower 3 is a little different than its predecessors, it does shares some similarities with them in terms of its story and character designs.
Originally planned to be Clock Tower 4, Haunting Ground, known as Demento (デメント) in Japan, it was released in 2005 for the PlayStation 2. In July, 2012 the ESRB listed the game as part of the PS2 Classics for the PlayStation Network. On 21 April 2015, Haunting Ground was re-released on the Japanese PlayStation Store. There is no news of a western re-release or of a sequel.
A spiritual successor to the series, NightCry, was released on March 29, 2016.
After Human Entertainment folded in 1999, the Clock Tower series was sold to Capcom. Clock Tower 3 was co-created by Capcom and Sunsoft  and published by Capcom. Not only was this part of the series created by a different company, it also offered 3D movement for the first time within the series. Capcom has not announced another game, although the Clock Tower spin-off, Haunting Ground was originally considered a spiritual sequel and was thought to be initially developed as Clock Tower 4.
The film was stuck in development hell until it was announced on G4's Attack of the Show! on April 30, 2008.
On September 9, 2008 it was reported that Brittany Snow would be playing the lead in Clock Tower. Filming is set to begin in November at Los Angeles. It is known that Scissorman will be included in the film, but his identity and backstory will be completely different from any of the games.
On October 7, Bloody Disgusting reported rumor that Milla Jovovich, star of the Resident Evil movie franchise was to play a role in Clock Tower. However, on October 14 a representative of Jovovich corrected Bloody Disgusting saying that Jovovich was not doing the movie. The only confirmed actor in the movie so far is Brittany Snow.
November 7 brought news that Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions Group had acquired domestic home entertainment and television distribution rights to Senator's release slate, which included Clock Tower. The long delayed movie has also been pushed back and is set to begin filming in December. It is unknown if the movie will, yet again, be pushed back further.
On December 16, eight promotional artwork and teaser posters were posted online, along with a synopsis and a TBA 2009 release date. The posters show the Scissorman extensively and it appears as though he will be wielding two knives that can join together into a makeshift pair of scissors (like the Scissorman/Scissorwoman in Clock Tower 3 appearance) rather than his trademark pair of shears.
In February 2009 it was revealed by Sony Pictures Worldwide Acquisitions Group that Clock Tower would have a 2010 release, but as of September 2010, it appears the film once again has no director and was described by Martin Weisz as "officially in limbo".
On November 29, 2011, it was announced that David R. Ellis, director of Snakes on a Plane, was attached to the project as the director, but he has since died, and the current movie status is unknown.
