The Pokémon Company (株式会社ポケモン, Kabushiki gaisha Pokemon) is a Japanese company that is responsible for marketing and licensing the Pokémon franchise. It was established through joint investment by the three businesses holding the copyright on Pokémon: Nintendo, Game Freak, and Creatures. It began operating in 1998 and adopted the moniker Pokémon Ltd. in October 2000. The company is headquartered in the Roppongi Hills Mori Tower in Roppongi, Minato, Tokyo.
The company has separate divisions that handle operations in different parts of the world, with The Pokémon Company International supporting the territories outside Asia, Australia, and New Zealand. In South Korea, the operations are handled by Pokémon Korea, Inc.
The company's operations began in 1998 with the opening of the Pokémon Center store in Tokyo, before the actual trademark of "Pokémon, Ltd." was established in 2000. Since then this branch has been marketed as The Pokémon Company. The United States branch (Pokémon USA, Inc.) opened in 2001 to handle licensing overseas. Nintendo Australia does all licensing and marketing of Pokémon products in Australia and New Zealand, as The Pokémon Company does not have an Australian branch.
Since 2001, nearly all licensed Pokémon products have "©Pokémon" in the copyright acknowledgments with the usual three of "©Nintendo", "©GAME FREAK inc." and "©Creatures Inc." The video games, Pokémon Trading Card Game and licensed toys are still being made by third- and second-party companies such as Tomy.
In October 2001 4Kids Entertainment(now know as 4Licensing Corporation) acquired a 3% stake In The Pokemon Company.
In October 2005 4Kids Entertainment sold its 3% stake in The Pokemon Company for $960,000 USD.
In 2006, Pokémon Korea, Inc. was founded to manage the company's operations in South Korea. The headquarters are located in Seoul.
In 2009, Pokémon USA and Pokémon UK merged to become The Pokémon Company International, which handles American and European Pokémon operations under the administration of Kenji Okubo. The company's offices in the United States are in Bellevue, Washington and its offices in the United Kingdom are in London. Australian operations are controlled by Nintendo Australia.
TV series
Movies
TV specials
