Daniel Brett "D. B." Weiss (born April 23, 1971) is an American author, screenwriter, producer, and director. Along with his collaborator David Benioff, he is best known as screenwriter, executive producer, and sometimes director of Game of Thrones, the HBO adaptation of George R. R. Martin's series of books.
His 2003 debut novel, Lucky Wander Boy, is themed around video games.
Weiss was born and raised in Chicago, Illinois. His family is Jewish. He is a graduate of Wesleyan University. He earned a Master of Philosophy in Irish literature from Trinity College, Dublin with a thesis on James Joyce's Finnegans Wake, and a Master of Fine Arts in creative writing from the Iowa Writers' Workshop.
Weiss worked as personal assistant on films such as The Viking Sagas for New Line Cinema. For a brief period, Weiss also worked as a personal assistant for Glenn Frey. Weiss then went to Dublin in 1995 to study Anglo-Irish literature and met David Benioff, and three years later they met again in Santa Monica, California around 1998.
Weiss and Benioff wrote a screenplay for a film titled The Headmaster together, but it was never made. In 2003, Weiss and Benioff were hired to collaborate on a new script of Orson Scott Card's book Ender's Game in consultation with the then-designated director Wolfgang Petersen. It was not used.
In 2006, Weiss said he has a second novel finished that "needs a second draft". That same year, Weiss completed a screenplay for a film adaptation of the video game series Halo, based on a script written by Alex Garland. However, director Neill Blomkamp declared the project dead in late 2007.
Weiss also worked on a script for a prequel to I Am Legend. However, in May 2011, director Francis Lawrence stated that he did not think the prequel was ever going to happen.
Weiss currently works with David Benioff, the writer of Troy, on the television series Game of Thrones, based on George R. R. Martin's book series A Song of Ice and Fire.
Weiss and his wife Andrea have two children, Leo and Hugo.
Lucky Wander Boy (2003)
Game of Thrones (2011–) Creator
It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, "Flowers for Charlie" (2013) Writer
The Specials (2014) Executive Producer
Game of Thrones season 4, episode 1 "Two Swords" – Benioff and Weiss both directed a couple of episodes together, but used a coin-flip to decide who would get the credit on the show. Weiss received the credit for this episode while Benioff was credited for "Walk of Punishment" in season 3.
D. B. Weiss at the Internet Movie Database