Akitoshi Kawazu (河津 秋敏, Kawazu Akitoshi, born November 5, 1962) is a Japanese game producer and game designer. He is best known for his work on Final Fantasy and SaGa franchise of role-playing video games.
Kawazu studied ceramics at the Tokyo Institute of Technology. Kawazu was invited by a friend to work at the gaming magazine published by Softbank called "Beep". He stated that he had always been interested in board games, and after a time joined Square Co. in 1985.
His first game at Square Co. was Rad Racer, creating the ending sequence showing a player's accomplishments.
He and Hironobu Sakaguchi had wanted to make a role playing game for a long time, and were fans of Wizardry and Ultima, but were concerned it would not sell. After the success in Japan of Dragon Quest, and the popular desire for an RPG proven, development began. Kawazu took over the development of the battle sequence and system, and tried to model it as much after Dungeons and Dragons as he could. Part of the development was to add western fantasy gaming rules, such as a fire monster being vulnerable to ice, which at the time were not features of Japanese gaming.
Production on The Last Remnant began after the remake of Romancing SaGa for the PlayStation 2 was completed. Kawazu was also involved in the development of "It's New Frontier" (sic). During the development of Final Fantasy XII, Yasumi Matsuno, who was the lead on the game, left half way through, and Kawazu took over.
Board games such as Avalon Hill and Dungeons and Dragons influence a lot of Kawazu's development process. When creating a new game, he examines the elements like a board game and makes that the working foundation.
Final Fantasy – Game design
Final Fantasy II – Game design
The Final Fantasy Legend – Director and scenario
Final Fantasy Legend II – Director and scenario
Romancing SaGa – Director, scenario, system design, and battle design
Romancing SaGa 2 – Director, scenario, and game design
Romancing SaGa 3 – Director
Rudra no Hihō – Director
SaGa Frontier – Producer and director
SaGa Frontier 2 – Producer
Racing Lagoon – Producer
Legend of Mana – Producer
Hataraku Chocobo – Producer
Wild Card – Game design
Unlimited Saga – Producer and director
Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles – Producer
Romancing SaGa: Minstrel Song – Producer and director
Code Age Commanders: Tsugu Mono Tsuga Reru Mono – Executive producer
Final Fantasy XII – Executive producer
Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles: Ring of Fates – Executive producer
Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles: My Life as a King – Executive producer
Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles: The Crystal Bearers – Executive producer, scenario writer
The Last Remnant – Executive producer, scenario writer
It's New Frontier – Design
Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy – Special thanks
Theatrhythm Final Fantasy – Special thanks
SaGa Scarlet Grace – Director and scenario
