Natsume Company Ltd. (ナツメ株式会社, Natsume Kabushiki kaisha) is a Japanese video game developer and publisher in Shinjuku, Tokyo, Japan founded on October 20, 1987. A completely separate company with the same name, Natsume Inc, is located in Burlingame, California. Natsume-Atari is known for developing licence titles and mobile games. Natsume Inc is best known for publishing unique, family-oriented niche games, such as the Harvest Moon and Reel Fishing.
During the NES and SNES era, Natsume-Atari developed numerous titles, often licensed, such as Power Rangers. Natsume Inc published numerous titles, including those developed by Natsume-Atari, such as S.C.A.T., Wild Guns and Shadow of the Ninja. Natsume also released the SNES game Pocky & Rocky as well as Lufia II: Rise of the Sinistrals. Natsume-Atari had also developed the Medabot games up until the end of the GBA era, which Natsume Inc published.
From the end of the Super NES era up until late 2014, Natsume Inc was known for publishing a series of Story of Seasons games in North America. The last game in the series they published was Harvest Moon: A New Beginning for the Nintendo 3DS. In 2015 the developer of the series, Marvelous AQL, brought the next game in the series, Story of Seasons, to North America with their own US branch, XSEED Games, ending the relationship they had with Natsume. Since then, Natsume has released their own games under the Harvest Moon name, starting with Harvest Moon: The Lost Valley, continuing with Harvest Moon: Seeds of Memories and the upcoming Harvest Moon: Skytree Village
Natsume has also operated an eBay shop, selling copies of older games sealed in their original packaging, collected from storage at its offices. At auction, the company sold a sealed copy of Pocky & Rocky for over $1,600.
Natsume-Atari was previously the parent company of Natsume Inc, founded in October 1988. By 1995 Natsume Inc had broken away into its own company and is separately owned and operated.
In October 2002, Natsume Co Ltd founded Atari Inc. (not to be confused with the American game company) in Osaka, specialized on developing slot and pinball machines.
On May 6, 2005, Natsume Solution began operation in Shinjuku, Osaka. This division specializes on web site development, providing mobile solutions/services and developing web systems. On March 1, 2006, Natsume Solution was merged with Evolve co.,ltd.
Meanwhile, Natsume Inc opened up a development studio of their own, named Natsume Inc Japan
The original Natsume Co Ltd company is now known as Natsume-Atari, and is not directly connected to Natsume Inc USA or its subsidiary Natsume Inc Japan.
Developer
Abadox
Brith Fighters
Chaos World (カオスワールド)
Chōjin Sentai Jetman (鳥人戦隊 ジェットマン)
Idol Hakkenden (アイドル八犬伝)
Imagine Dreams
Power Blade
Power Blade 2
Shadow Of The Ninja
Shatterhand
Super Scroll Visio
TD: Multiforce
The Three-Eyed One
Touhou Kenbun Roku
Developer, JP Publisher
Dragon Fighter
Dungeon Magic: Sword of the Elements
The Jetsons: Cogswell's Caper!
Super Star Force 2
Developer, JP/US Publisher
S.C.A.T.: Special Cybernetic Attack Team
Shadow of the Ninja
Developer, EUR Publisher
Wooding Forest
Mitsume ga Tooru: The Three-Eyed One Comes Here
Developer/Publisher
Harvest Moon GB
Legend of the River King
Spanky's Quest
Tail 'Gator
Developer
Casper
Medarot: Kabuto Version
Medarot: Parts Collection
Medarot: Parts Collection 2
Ninja Gaiden: Shadow
Publisher
Amazing Penguin
US Publisher
Medarot: Kuwagata Version
Developer/Publisher
Spanky's Quest
Pocky & Rocky
Ghost Sweeper Mikami: Joreishi ha Nice Body
The Ninja Warriors
Developer
Zennihon Pro Wrestling (全日本プロレス)
Natsume Championship Wrestling
Wild Guns
Pocky & Rocky 2
Casper
Mighty Morphin Power Rangers
Mighty Morphin Power Rangers: The Fighting Edition
Shin Kidō Senki Gundam Wing: Endless Duel (新機動戦記ガンダムＷ Ｅｎｄｌｅｓｓ Ｄｕｅｌ)
Power Rangers Zeo: Battle Racers
Gekisō Sentai Carranger: Zenkai! Racer Senshi
NA Publisher
Lufia II: Rise of the Sinistrals
Harvest Moon
Developer
Sagaia
Special Criminal Investigation
Renegade
Highway 2000
Virtual Casino
Publisher
Big Mutha Truckers
Developer/Publisher
Harvest Moon 64
Publisher
Lode Runner
Reel Fishing
Bust-A-Move 4
Burstrick Wake Boarding
Turnabout
Blockids
Big Mutha Truckers
Reel Fishing II
NA Publisher
Harvest Moon: Back to Nature
Skydiving Extreme
Gekioh Shooting King
Tetris Plus
Developer/Publisher
Hole in One Golf
Lufia: The Legend Returns
Developer, NA/EU Publisher
Legend of the River King
Harvest Moon 3
Keitai Denjū Telefang
Developer
WWF WrestleMania 2000
Dragon Dance
Power Rangers Lightspeed Rescue
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater
Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 2
Croc 2
Harvest Moon 2
Power Rangers Time Force
The Land Before Time
Action Man: Search for Base X
Publisher
Legend of the River King 2
Developer
Shaun Palmer's Pro Snowboarder
WWF Road to WrestleMania
Medarot Navi: Kabuto
Power Rangers: Wild Force
Buffy the Vampire Slayer: Wrath of the Darkhul King
Power Rangers Ninja Storm
Power Rangers: Dino Thunder
WWE Survivor Series
NA Publisher
Car Battler Joe
CIMA: The Enemy
Pocky & Rocky with Becky
Harvest Moon: Friends of Mineral Town
Gundam SEED: Battle Assault
Developer/Publisher
Medabots AX
Keitai Denjū Telefang II
Harvest Moon: More Friends of Mineral Town
Publisher
Wizardry Summoner
WWE Road to WrestleMania X8
Publisher
Harvest Moon: Save the Homeland
Metropolismania
Metropolismania 2
Reel Fishing III
NA Publisher
Harvest Moon: A Wonderful Life Special Edition
River King: A Wonderful Journey
Ruff Trigger: The Vanocore Conspiracy
Innocent Life: A Futuristic Harvest Moon Special Edition
NA & EU Publisher
Chulip
Developer
Fullmetal Alchemist: Dual Sympathy
Nicktoons: Battle for Volcano Island
Kirby: Squeak Squad
Nicktoons: Attack of the Toybots
Nicktoons: Globs of Doom
Kamen Rider: Dragon Knight
Publisher
Freedom Wings
Puzzle de Harvest Moon
Hi Hamtaro! Little Hamsters Big Adventure
Princess Debut
Harvest Moon: Sunshine Islands
Lufia: Curse of the Sinistrals
Rune Factory: A Fantasy Harvest Moon
Harvest Moon DS
Harvest Moon DS Cute
Harvest Moon: Island of Happiness
Harvest Moon: Frantic Farming
Rune Factory 2: A Fantasy Harvest Moon
Harvest Moon DS: Sunshine Islands
Harvest Moon DS: Grand Bazaar
Rune Factory 3: A Fantasy Harvest Moon
Harvest Moon DS: The Tale of Two Towns
Witch's Wish
Cheer we Go
River King: Mystic Valley
Developer/Publisher
Harvest Moon: Frantic Farming
Cheer we Go
Developer
Gabrielle's Zombie Attack
Gabrielle's Sweet Defense
Gabrielle's Monster Match
Ninja Climb
Reel Fishing Pocket
NA Publisher
Harvest Moon: A Wonderful Life
Harvest Moon: Magical Melody
Publisher
Medabots Infinity
Developer/Publisher
Harvest Moon: Another Wonderful Life
Publisher
Adventures To Go!
Carnage Heart EXA
Harvest Moon: Boy & Girl
Harvest Moon: Hero of Leaf Valley
Innocent Life: A Futuristic Harvest Moon
Mystic Chronicles
Reel Fishing: The Great Outdoors
Publisher
Animal Kingdom: Wildlife Expedition
Gabrielle's Ghostly Groove: Monster Mix (WiiWare)
Harvest Moon: Animal Parade
Harvest Moon: My Little Shop (WiiWare)
Harvest Moon: Tree of Tranquility
Moki Moki (WiiWare)
Reel Fishing Angler’s Dream
Reel Fishing Challenge (WiiWare)
Reel Fishing Challenge II (WiiWare)
Reel Fishing: Ocean Challenge (WiiWare)
NA Publisher
Afrika
Rune Factory: Tides of Destiny
Developer
Omega Five (Xbox Live Arcade)
Developer
Gabrielle's Ghostly Groove 3D
Reel Fishing Paradise 3D
Publisher
Brave Tank Hero
Gotcha Racing
Hometown Story
Harvest Moon: The Tale of Two Towns 3D
Harvest Moon: A New Beginning
Harvest Moon: The Lost Valley
Yumi's Odd Odyssey
Publisher
Harvest Moon: Seeds of Memories
