V Jump (ブイジャンプ, Bui Janpu) is a Japanese magazine about new manga and video games based on popular manga. The magazine's debut was in 1993 by Shueisha under the Jump line of magazines.
A prototype magazine called Hobby's Jump was launched in the 80s as a spin-off issue of Monthly Shōnen Jump. Hobby's Jump was announced discontinued, and a new magazine called V Jump arrived. V Jump is a video game magazine, mostly for the series Dragon Quest (artwork done by Akira Toriyama, author of Dragon Ball and Dr. Slump) and the Final Fantasy series, as well as many Shōnen manga.
V Jump has also taken many series from Weekly Shōnen Jump, such as Shadow Lady created by Masakazu Katsura, which has had more success than ever in V Jump. Later on, the magazine published a sequel to the classic Weekly Jump series Dr. Slump, characters from which appeared on the cover of the first issue of V Jump, titled The Brief Return of Dr. Slump (written by Takao Koyama and illustrated by Katsuyoshi Nakatsuru). After the Dr. Slump series, an adaption of the spin-off anime Yu-Gi-Oh!: Duel Monsters GX called Yu-Gi-Oh! GX began serialization. The serialization of the series Yu-Gi-Oh! R has just ended as of December 21, 2007
V Jump Books is a line of V Jump manga and video game guides and some of the premiere editions. It mostly does guides for the series of Square Enix. It is the other publisher of Disney Books in Japan along with Kodansha since it published books and guides for the Kingdom Hearts games.
V Jump's primary content is the information regards the video/arcade games and the card games. Therefore, there are limited numbers of manga titles have been serialized in V Jump. Most of the manga titles in V Jump are the comicalization of the animation and the video/card games.
There are currently fourteen manga titles being regularly serialized in V Jump.
The Brief Return of Dr. Slump
Bakuen CAMPUS Guardress
Digimon Adventure V-Tamer 01
Digimon Next
Digimon Xros Wars
Dragon Ball: Episode of Bardock
Go! Go! Ackman
Haō Taikei Ryū Knight
Kinnikuman II-Sei: All Chōjin Dai Shingeki
Onmyō Taisenki
Smash Bomber
Shadow Lady
Viewtiful Joe
Yu-Gi-Oh! GX
Yu-Gi-Oh! R
