Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 3 is a skateboarding video game in the Tony Hawk's series. It was developed by Neversoft and published by Activision in 2001 for the PlayStation 2, PlayStation, GameCube and Game Boy Color. In 2002, it was published for the Xbox, Game Boy Advance, Microsoft Windows, Nintendo 64 and Mac OS. It was the first game released for the PlayStation 2 supporting online play, and the last game released on the Nintendo 64 in North America. According to Metacritic, Pro Skater 3 and Grand Theft Auto III hold an average critic score of 97/100, making them the highest-rated PlayStation 2 games of all time.
This game saw the introduction of the revert, a trick that enabled vert combos to be tied together with a manual, by tapping a button when landing in a quarterpipe. This allowed for much longer combos than in the previous two games, where landing in a quarterpipe would finish a combo. The game also added hidden combos. These were variations on standard tricks that could be performed as grab, flip, lip, or grind tricks. For example, double-tapping the kickflip button would, naturally, make the character perform a double kickflip. This system would later be refined in Pro Skater 4.
The game stood out in the franchise for being the first title to have online capabilities. Users could connect directly to other players online on the PlayStation 2 version—even prior to the launch of the network adapter, with a USB Ethernet adapter. Due to the shut down of most Sony servers the game is no longer playable with others online, except for via programs like XLink Kai or through websites that allow users to play online through a DNS. The PlayStation and Nintendo 64 versions run on the Pro Skater 2 engine, with a different revert animation that is the same as the PlayStation version of Pro Skater 4.
In both the Nintendo 64 and PlayStation versions, the wooden sides on the board (around the grip tape) had colors (except Bam Margera, Jamie Thomas, and the custom skater's decks), and the game had brand new tricks such as the Cannonball, Wrap Around, Fingerflip, Del Mar Indy and a brand new animation for the Airwalk. The Xbox version had an improved framerate over the PlayStation 2 and GameCube version, also including an exclusive level, the Oil Rig.
Pro Skater 3's soundtrack album was released on October 16, 2001 by Warner Bros. Records. There are four songs that are missing on the album that were featured in the game. Also, some of the songs were not present in the PlayStation version.
The game has sold 2.4 million copies worldwide and received a widespread critical acclaim. The PS2 version earned a rare perfect 10 score from GameSpot, one of only eleven games to ever receive said score, "Probably because of the freedom given in this game." It was also awarded the best sports game award at the 2001 E3. IGN rated the game 9.7/10, stating that the game "Should go down in history as one of the best twitch-fests on PS2. Yes, TH3 is that good. The perfect skating game remains just a tiny hair's breadth out of reach, but if you are not satisfied with your purchase of this game, head examinations are recommended." The game is currently the top rated PS2 game on the review aggregate website Metacritic, with an average score of 97/100, tying with Grand Theft Auto III. Famitsu gave the game a 30/40.
E3 2001 Game Critics Awards: Best Sports Game
2002 Interactive Achievement Awards: Best Sports Console Game
